Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Itu9ru1VDMI
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are coming to the last section of the Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna will focus on
bhakti. So, in the previous section, we discussed about how Krishna talks about
karma-yoga within the varnashram framework. Then, spiritualising that
karma-yoga. By offering, by working for His pleasure. Then, "sva-karmaṇā tam
abhyarcya". By working for worshipping him. Then, we discussed about jnana-yoga.
And then, Krishna talked it from 18.57 how, you know, 56-57, how, whatever level
one may be at, one can practice bhakti-yoga. And elevate oneself. So, let us
continue with 18.58 now. So, 18.58, we see over here. You know.

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi
        atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān
        na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi

So, you know, you know, this is, you know, one of the most directly indicative
verses, you know, in the Bhagavad Gita for the, you know, you know, for, for the
phrase "Krishna Consciousness". Sometimes, people ask this question, where does
this, you know, Krishna Consciousness term come from? It seems to, it does not
seem to be like a very directly Vedic term. Consciousness seems to be like a
modern concept. But "mac-cittaḥ". "mat" is referring to Krishna. "cittaḥ" is
consciousness. So, "mac-cittaḥ". And Krishna is very directly telling if you
become conscious of Me. "mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi". "durgā" is obstacles. All
obstacles, we will overcome. You know. How? "mat-prasādāt". By My mercy, what
will happen? "tariṣyasi". "tariṣyasi" means you will cross over all obstacles.
You will go beyond all obstacles. "atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān". If however, you
know, you know, because of "ahaṅkārān". Because of pride, you do not, you know,
do this. Then, what will happen? "na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi". "vinaṅkṣyasi". You
will be lost. If you do not hear Me out of arrogance, you will be lost. So,
here, we see that Krishna is demonstrating, instructing by contrasting. You
know. So, this is a, in 18, 18.58 is direct reference what will happen by
practice of Krishna Consciousness. What will happen by lack of practice of
Krishna Consciousness? So, this can be phrased as "With Krishna, we flourish;
without Krishna, we perish.". So, Krishna has done this repeatedly, 3.31 and 32.
As well as 4.39-40. Both talk about faith.

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto

And:

        ye me matam idaṁ nityam
        anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ

These are 31-32. And:

        śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ

And:

        ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca

So, there, Krishna is contrasting by saying that, you know, you know, you know,
you will get one result if you have faith in Me. And you will get another
result if you do not have faith in Me. And then, after that, in 9.25, also,
Krishna is talking, is contrasting where famously, He says that, you know:

        yānti deva-vratā devān
        pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ
        bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā
        yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām

You know. So, depending on whom we choose to worship, we will get an
appropria..., accor..., a result accordingly. So, now, instructing by
contrasting indicates that th..., th..., Krishna is giving us choices. The
Bhagavad Gita is not so much a book of commandments. It is a book of choices and
consequences. Choices. Ok. These are the choice..., this, you can do this. You
can do this. You can do this. And depending on what you do, accordingly, you
will get the result. So, then, choose what you want to do. Choices. And
the consequences. You know. You know. So, here, Krishna is telling, if you
become con..., conscious of Me. "mac-cittaḥ". "sarva-durgāṇi". All obstacles.
"mat-prasādāt". So, the word "prasādāt" has, you know, come in the Bhagavad Gita
earlier. "prasādāt" means mercy. You know. "mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi". Kri..., has
used the word, "tariṣyasi" means, actually, float over. Almost. Krishna has used
the word, similar word when we talked about surrender to Him in 7.14. When He
says, you know:

        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

"taranti". "taranti" means to float over. You know. So, you know, you know, in,
material ocean is, is a dangerous ocean. And, you know, we can easily sink into
this ocean. But by Krishna's mercy, we will float over it. So, how, the, Krishna
has talked about crossing the material ocean, also, famously in:

        teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā
        mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt

"ahaṁ samuddhartā mṛtyu-saṁsāra". I am the deliverer from the ocean of material
existence. So, what does this actually mean? When we say, Krishna says, you will
pass all obstacles by My grace. Actually, you know, material world is a place of
obstacles. You know. It is not that when we become devotees, you know, suddenly,
some magic wand is blong. And obstacles go away. No. Whether we are devotees, or
whether we are non-devotees, obstacles are there for everyone. You know. The
difference is, is in attitude. The difference is in un..., con..., in
consciousness. In understanding what purpose the problems serve. You know. You
know. So, for a devotee, and a non-devotee, the problems serve different
purposes. So, suffering will come to all. You know. Non-devotees get suffering.
And their suffering simply leads to frustration. You know. Whereas, for a
devotee, you know, suffering leads to realisation. Renunciation. And devotion.
So, let us understand this difference between the two. You know. You know. You
know. What do we mean by problems or suffering? It essentially means that, you
know, we have certain plans to do things. And by that, we want to get enjoyment.
So, it is basically about enjoying. And, you know, is, as souls, we are
anandamaya. We are sat-cit-ananda. So, you know, happiness is a, is a part of
the nature of the soul. But unfortunately, this nature gets distorted when the
soul forgets that, I am actually a part of Krishna. And tries to, you know,
enjoy at the bodily level. Because of misidentification with the body. So, then,
the enjoying nature becomes limited to the material level. And there are many
obstacles which come at the material level to our plans for enjoyment. So, you
know, you know, because for a materialistic person, material life is the only
life. There is nothing beyond material life. And therefore, material enjoyment
is the only enjoyment. And if there is no enjoyment possible at the material
level, then there is no enjoyment at all. You know. So, you know, when there are
problems which obstruct or even, you know, destroy material enjoyment. Destroy
the possibilities for material enjoyment, then the end result is complete
frustration, is disappoint. So, you know, you know, that is how a person gets
blocked and trapped. Person gets lost. Because of not understanding that, you
know, you know, you know, there is an alternative, better way of enjoyment
possible. Materialistic people think that, ok, material track of enjoyment is
the only track of enjoyment available for them. And when there is, enjoyment is
not possible on that track. Then, there is simply misery. Simply misery. So, on
the other hand, for a devotee, you know, there is understanding, there is
material enjoyment. But there is a higher, richer enjoyment. Spiritual
enjoyment. That is, actually, when we serve Krishna. And please Krishna. You
know. We automatically get happiness by that. So, that is the, you know, purpose
and perfection of life. So, now, for a non-devotee, you know, because material
enjoyment is the only form of enjoyment, when there is no en..., when the
enjoyment at the material level is frustrated. Then, it leads to, is obstructed.
And then it simply leads to frustration. The frustration can lead to, people may
go into alcoholism. They may become, get depressed. They become violent. You
know. When that violence is directed towards others, people become, people beat
others. Shout at others. You know. They expre..., when their anger, their
frustration is expressed externally, it comes out as violence. And when their
exte..., ang..., their anger is expressed, the frustration is expressed
internally, then that may lead to self-pity. Inferiority complex. It may even
lead to suicide. So, either way, it leads to misery. You know. So, now, for a
devotee, when there are problems, that means on the material track of life,
there are obstacles. So, what does it lead to? It leads to realisation.
Renunciation. And devotion. Let us understand these three. Realisation.
Realisation means that a devotee understands that, actually, you know, what the
scriptures are telling is true. That when the scriptures say this world is a
place of misery, I am experiencing it now.

So, for a devotee, that which scriptures are telling us, the reality of this
world, the devotee, rea..., understands this is a reality. So, realisation
means, as we have discussed earlier to understand that that, you know, to accept
as a reality that which is, scriptures are telling is the reality. So, that this
world is a place of misery. Devotee gets realisation. And from the realisation
comes renunciation. Renunciation means, devotee understands, you know, yes, I
cannot go about trying to be the controller. And enjoyer. I have to be the
servant. Whatever situation Krishna will put me in, I will serve Him in that
situation. So, there is, you know, ren..., you know, renunciation that comes.
Renunciation of what? Not, this is not, this, the ren..., this renunciation is
not frustration. Renunciation is actually, you know, the understanding that I
cannot be the enjoyer or the controller. But that does not mean I cannot be the
servant. And as a servant, you know, I may try to plan. And, you know, do the
best service possible. But still, I am a servant. So, that renunciation means
giving up the enjoying mentality. Controlling mentality. And then, when we
become fixed in the understanding that we are His servants. Then, we see that,
actually, through service, I get greater happiness. You know. If I just, you
know, s..., focus on this idea that, Krishna, I am your servant. Please guide me
how I can serve You. Then, that att..., service attitude brings so much peace.
And even in the long run, pleasure. So, that is how we get devotion. We see,
yes, Krishna is always my master. Krishna is always there to pro..., guide and
protect me. And no matter what happens, Krishna will never leave me. You know.
So, what happens is, our attraction to Krishna increases. So, in this way, for a
devotee, and a non-devotee, both problems come. But the response is huge...,
there is a world of difference. For a non-devotee, the response is simply
frustration. For a devotee, it is rea..., renunciation. Realisation. And
devotion. You know. You know. Now, or realisation. Renunciation. Devotion. That
sequence, now, after this, further, we will, let us look at it. Now, when we say
we transcend problems, so transcending problems means not letting the problems
dominate our consciousness. But becoming, you know, Krishna Conscious. So,
transcending problems means what? Problems are there. But we do not let the
problems, you know, fill in our consciousness. So, you know, you know, you know,
as it is said over here, you know, you know, if I am in a, next to a skyscraper
building. Then, I am very tiny. And a pro..., the building seems to be giant.
But if I am in an airplane, then from the point of the airplane, where I am,
the, if the giant skyscraper also appears to be small. So, like that, when we
are, when we think that we are alone, then we feel ourselves tiny. I wonder how
will I deal with the situation. But when we become connected with Krishna, we
understand that Krishna is the greatest. And He is on our side. You know. He is
with us. Then, we do not feel, you know, puny. And tiny. Yes, we are puny and
tiny in front of Krishna. But we do not feel puny and tiny in front of the
problem. Because we understand that, yes, the problem may be tiny for me. But
not for Krishna. Krishna is with me. And He will help me deal with this. So, you
know, you know, transcending the problems means, we do not let the problem
dominate our consciousness. You know. In the Seventh Canto, in the Ninth
Chapter, at the prayers of Prahlada Maharaja to Lord "Narasiṃha" Deva. And
before that, in the Eighth Chapter towards the end, at the prayers by the
devatas to Lord "Narasiṃha" Deva. These devatas' prayers were unsuccessful. In
the sense that, they did not satisfy and pacify the Lord. They were successful
in the sense that any attempt to the glorify the Supreme Lord leads to
purification. In that sense, they were successful. But they did not satisfy the
Supreme Lord. They did not pacify Him. It was Prahlad's prayers which pacified
the Lord.

So, there, when Indra offers prayers in 7.8 to, you know, then, Seventh Canto,
Eighth Chapter, so, there, he says, my dear Lord, you know, because of
"Hiranyakashipu"'s power, and his cruelty, you know, he had started dominating
our heart. And because of which, we could not think of You, worship You, above,
offer sacrifices for Your pleasure. Now, that he has been killed. Now, that You
have very con..., mercifully killed him. Now, our hearts will become free from
this domination. And we will be able to love and serve You. We will be able to
continue our devotions, our service to you. Through sacrifices. And other
duties. You know. So, in contrast, we see, Prahlada Maharaja says that,
actually, whatever happens, I am completely fixed in Your service, my dear Lord.
So, he says that, also, I do not even want to, I am not concerned about the
miseries of material existence. I am not concerned about the, you know, you
know, He, He wa..., throughout, I am not concerned about anything. I simply want
to glorify You, my dear Lord. And I want to get others to glorify You, also. So,
we do not see in Prahlada's life that he, because Hiranyakashipu was such a, we
could say, in modern language, terr..., terrorist. A mega terrorist. You know.
He was, you know, now, today's terrorists may, say, terrorise a city. Or a
country. But Hiranyakashipu was terrorising the whole universe. And such a
terrorist, what happened to him? What did, you know, you know, the Lord do? The
Lord basically, you know, killed him effortlessly. And, you know, but when he
was there. And Prahlada was staying in the same house. And he had to bear the
brunt of the anger of the, of Hiranyakashipu. And he was tormented. And
threatened. And insulted. And attempte..., attempted to be assassinated. But
through it all, he remained determined. So, how could he remain so determined?
Because, you know, his consciousness was fixed and absorbed in Krishna.
"Narasiṃha" Deva, you know, the s..., the, he was worshipping Lord Vishnu. You
know. So, that Lord Vishnu was, remained fixed in his consciousness. It was not
that, you know, you know, Vishnu became displaced. And, you know,
"Hiranyakashipu" came in. And he was fearful. So, this is the difference between
mixed devotion. And pure devotion. So, for a devotee, when there are problems.
You know. The problems start troubling too much. Then, what it indicates is
that, we are not sheltered in Krishna properly. The more we take shelter of
Krishna, the less the problems will shake us. And that, less the problems shake
us, the more, we will be able to, we stay calm. And deal with the problems
better. So, we do not let the problems dominate our consciousness. And as it is
said over here that do not tell Krishna, you know, you know, do not tell Krishna
how big our problems are. Tell the problems how big Krishna is. You know.
Krishna is the biggest. And He, nothing can stop Him. Nothing can, as thwart
him. So, by His mercy, we can deal with any situation. And every situation. And
now, significant point is that devotee, Prabhupada m..., writes this, actually,
a devotee may be perplexed. But he is never discouraged. So, what is the
difference between perplexed and discouraged? So, Prabhupada writes this in a
"Bhāgavatam" purport. Perplexed means indecisive. Indecisive means, oh, should I
do this? Should I not do this? Maybe, I want to do this. But probably, it is not
good for me to do it. I do not know. So, perplexed means that, ok, there is this
problem. This problem. This problem. How will I deal with the situation? How
will I move forward? So, even for a devotee, sometimes, it may happen that
devotee, it may, it may not be very clear about how one should go ahead. And
serve Krishna. So, Srila Prabhupada faced this several times in his life. You
know. He worked so hard to build a league of devotees. And then, just when his
mission started to ha..., seemed to be picking up nicely, at that time, there
was a clear, there was a sort of conspiracy against him. And he was,
practically, thrown out from the place which was going to be his international
headquarter. It was in a Vjihasi. You know.

So, you know, you know, at that time, you know, you know, what was Srila
Prabhupada going to do? So, it was not that, just because somebody is a pure
devotee means that every single step is completely clear. And the road from here
to glory is straight and clear. No. That road is also be revealed to Krishn...,
revealed by Krishna to Prabhupada. As, ok, you know, how this situation, do
this. Now, this situation, do this. So, Prabhupada also uses intelligence. And
he said, ok, you know, Indians are not taking this very seriously, so, let me go
to America. And preach. In America, also, he found that people seem to be
satisfied in their own bod..., daily pleasures. And they did not want anything
higher. So, then, he went to the people who were rejecting those things. And
seeking something higher. That was the hippies. So, in this way, Srila
Prabhupada went. And he struggled, also. But, you know, at point, so, for one
time, Prabhupada was staying, you know, you know, in the bo..., in the bowery.
And then, his room partner, you know, he took drugs, and he att..., he went mad.
So, at that time, Prabhupada had to practically for the sa..., life, this person
who became, who got a drug-induced madness. He came to attack Srila Prabhupada.
You know. You know. You know. And at that time, Prabhupada was, you know, had to
practically leave, leave immediately to save his life. And when he came out on
the streets, and there, hippies laying on the grounds, senseless because of
having taken drugs overnight. And there was some bums laying here and there
doing nothing 19:16
