Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rY3H2-qixo8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=rY3H2-qixo8&event=video_description&redir_token=MTIR47mMyHN_453yaP-Rk6cT6G18MTU0ODQ4OTUzMEAxNTQ4NDAzMTMw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_119_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.04-13.12_-_The_components_of_kshetra_and_jnana_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the Thirteenth Chapter with the Bhagavad Gita. The Thirteenth Chapter is
often considered to be the philosophically most, you know, complex and intricate
chapters. And it contains many verses which are, you know, quite difficult to
comprehend. And we will come to that section. Especially the section 13.13 to 19
is quite abstruse. Abstruse means, you know, difficult to comprehend. So, the,
we are, just now started discussing about "kṣetra" and "kṣetra-jñaṁ". So, let us
look at 13.4.

        tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca
        yad-vikāri yataś ca yat
        sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca
        tat samāsena me śṛṇu

"tat kṣetraṁ". "yac ca yādṛk ca". "tat kṣetraṁ" refers to that "kṣetraṁ". So,
basically, this is a verse which is like a summary verse. Which talks about
what, all that is going to come later in the chapter. "yac ca yādṛk ca".
"yad-vikāri yataś ca yat". So, you know, you know, you know, Prabhupada
translate that that that field, then as it is, "yādṛk". "vikāri". Whatever
changes. "yataś". "yataś" is what is its origin. "yat-prabhāvaś". What are its
influences? "tat samāsena". In summary. "me śṛṇu". Please hear. So, therefore,
what we are looking at now is, you know, you know, Ar..., Krishna is telling
Arjuna, in brief, I am explaining. So, let us look at what is all there. So,
13.4 is a co..., summary verse. Which will be, you know, giving a glimpse of
what is going to come later. So, how the body is constituted. That is text 6.
What changes the body undergoes. That is mentioned in text 7. And text 20. How,
when, and where the body is produced, you know, that is 6. 21. And 22. The
identity of the knower and the field of activities. You know. That is text 14 to
18. And 23. And the influence of the knower. That is "prabhāvaḥ". So, text 14 to
18. So, basically, there are five topics. Which are mentioned in this. "yad
kṣetraṁ...":

        tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca
        yad-vikāri yataś ca yat
        sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca
        tat samāsena me śṛṇu

So, "tat samāsena". In summary, it is being described over here. So, let us look
at Srila Prabhupada's purport briefly. You know. Basically, Prabhupada says
that, you know:

"This is something like equating the potent and the impotent."

What is that? He says the Jiva with the Supreme Lord. So, the Supreme Lord has
all potencies. The Jiva is not exactly impotent. But as compared to the potency
of the Supreme Lord, the Jiva's potency is insignificant. That is why we cannot
equate the Jiva with the Supreme Lord. So, now, let us loo..., move to the next
verse.

        ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ
        chandobhir vividhaiḥ pṛthak
        brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva
        hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ

"ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ". So, "ṛṣibhir bahudhā". That the "ṛṣi"s have sung, you
know, va..., in various ways. Have. So, "gītaṁ" can refer to songs. It can also
used to defer, descriptions. So, "ṛṣibhir bahudhā". The "ṛṣi"s, in various ways,
have described, the "chandobhir". By the Vedic wi..., hymns. "vividhaiḥ pṛthak".
Various. So, different "ṛṣi"s have defried..., described in different hymns. In
different way. And this is also being talked about in "brahma-sūtra-padaiś
caiva". "brahma-sūtra" refers to the "Vedānta-sūtra". Now, this word has many
names. Generally, Prabhupada would prefer the name "Vedānta-sūtra" to describe
this. The, you know, traditional commentators. That is why Madhvācārya, he says
commentary in the "brahma-sūtra. That is what, gene..., normally would be the
word that is used. They all mean the same thing. "brahma-sūtra" and
"Vedānta-sūtra". So, you know, you know, you know, as we have discussed in the
first class. When we discussed the overview of the six systems of philosophy.
That, you know, "Vedānta" is the conclusion among the six systems of philosophy.
And this particular book establishes how "Vedānta" is the conclusion of all the
systems of philosophy. So, it is called as "Vedānta-sūtra". At the same time,
the book is also talking about Brahman as the ultimate reality. So, in that
sense, it is also "brahma-sūtra". So, here, Prabhu..., Bhakt..., here, Krishna,
in the Bhagavad Gita, is using the word "brahma-sūtra" to describe this.
"brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva". So, you know, you know, "padaiḥ" refers to the
sections of the "brahma-sūtra". There are "adhaiya"s. And there are "padaiḥ"s in
the, you know, adikar..., there are adikaranas. "adhaiya"s. "padaiḥ"s. "padaiḥ"
is a unit of, you know, unit of prose construction. Just like we have chapters.
So, like that, "padaiḥ" is also a unit. So:

        brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva
        hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ

"hetu-madbhiḥ" refer..., refers, refers to cause and effect. Or logic. The
"brahma-sūtra" is largely based on logic. It focuses on explaining how, you
know, you know, it is, starts with scripture. So, the whole purpose of the
"Vedānta-sūtra" is to establish how Brahman is the ultimate reality. And the way
it does it is by sequential progression. It establishes step by step by step
how, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, how,
you know, the various systems of thought that are there, there were there at
that particular time including, h..., not just the, you know, orthodox thoughts.
But also the heterodox thought. Orthodox are those which accept the Vedantic
systems of sch..., philosophy. Which accept Veda as the authority. And
heterodox are those which reject Veda as authority. So Buddhism. Janism.
Charvakism are heterodox. Whereas, you know, yoga. Memi..., you know, yoga,
Vedanta, you know, Sankhya Yoga. Then, "Vaiśeṣika". Then, Namamsa. And Vedanta.
You know. So, all these are, you know, you know, the, you know, you know, you
know, orthodox. Orthodox means these accept Vedic authority. So, whatever be the
schools of thought, how among them, the Vedanta is the highest. That is what is
established. And scripture is quoted. But the m..., import of scripture is
established through both, you know, quoting other parallel scripture verses. And
also as through, you know, you know, establishing the authority by, you know,
logical inferences. So, we see significantly here, Krishna is quoting authority.
Krishna is saying, what I am speaking is not something which I have concocted.
Of course, what Krishna speaks is never concocted. Because Krishna is the
ultimate authority. But Krishna is setting a standard by saying that, He, He,
what He is speaking is, what has been spoken earlier by the great sages.
Chanda, chanda can refer to a particular way in which the Vedic hymns are
recited. Chanda can also refer to "Chandogya Upanishad". There are also the
word, chanda comes over there. So, you know, you know, generally, the Vedic
hymns do not talk so much about the ultimate reality directly. The Vedic hymns
focus more on karma kanda. And the ultimate reality is talked about more in the
Upanishads. So, here, chanda can, you know, refer to "Chandogya Upanishad". Now,
Prabhupada explains that, there is "Vedānta-sūtra". And then is "Parāśara"
sutra, also. Prabhupada says that:

"Vyāsadeva’s father, Parāśara, is also a great sage, and he writes in his books
of religiosity, aham tvaṁ ca tathānye.… “"

You know. That we:

"are all transcendental,"

You know. You know.

        aham tvaṁ ca tathānye

That verse, that is actually more or less similar to, you know, "na...":

        na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ

And 2.12:

        na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ

That, you know, all of us. I. You. And all these kings. We are all
indestructible. You know. You know. So, you know, "brahma pucchaṁ pratiṣṭhā".
This is what we discussed last time. The five levels. "Anna-maya". "Prana-maya".
So, the connection of all this is that these are various levels that which
Brahman is manifested. And this is where, levels at which we ultimately realise
the Absolute Truth. So, Prbhupada writes:

"One has to search for this truth in the Vedānta-sūtra, or Brahma-sūtra."

So, then Prabhupada quotes a few "sūtra"s. You know. You know. From the
"Vedānta-sūtra". That we will, we will not go into that. As we, they are quite
technical. Now, we come to descr..., we have description "sankhya". So:

        mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro
        buddhir avyaktam eva ca
        indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ ca
        pañca cendriya-gocarāḥ

        icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ
        saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ
        etat kṣetraṁ samāsena
        sa-vikāram udāhṛtam

So, "mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro". So, as we know, there are twenty-four elements in
Sankhya. Which are listed in the sixth verse. So, "mahā-bhūtāny". Which are the
"mahā-bhūtāny"? Earth. Water. Fire. And air. And ether. They are considered
gigantic elements. These are five. Then, "ahaṅkāraḥ" is the sixth element.
"ahaṅkāraḥ" refers to false ego. Then, "buddhiḥ" is the seventh. "avyaktam" is
the unmanifested. The "pradhan". That is the eighth. Then, "indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ
ca". So, five "karmendriya"s. Five "jñānendriya"s. And the mind. So, "daśaikaṁ".
They are eleven. So, we had six in the first line. Two in the second line. That
is eight. And then, we have eleven in the third line. That is, you know, you
know, nineteen. And then, "pañca cendriya-gocarāḥ". And then, the five sense
objects. There is form. Touch. Taste. You know. Smell. And, you know, you know,
sound. So, like that, they are the, you know, five sense objects. So, these
constitute the, you know, twenty-four elements. So, Krishna i..., what is
Krishna describing over here? What is going on in this section, actually? We
understand that there is "kṣetra". And there is "kṣetra-jñaṁ". So, now, Krishna
is right now describing the "kṣetra". So, first, He described "kṣetra-jñaṁ"
briefly as, see, He is the, you know, that, one who is a knower of the field.
That the atma. And the Paramatma. And then, He is saying, now, I am going to
describe to you where, where the "kṣetra" comes from. So, He is describing that
here. And He is describing various things in connection with that. So, "pañca
cendriya-gocarāḥ". So, like that, you know, the "kṣetra" is material nature.
What is material nature constituted of? These twenty-four elements. So, He
is describing the twenty-four elements. Now, He moves forward. And He starts
describing further:

        icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ
        saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ
        etat kṣetraṁ samāsena
        sa-vikāram udāhṛtam

So, it is intre..., interesting. You know. So, Krishna had told in the fourth
verse that, you know, that "kṣetraṁ", you know, "vikāri yataś ca". So, "vikāram"
is transformations. So, what are the transformation? What are the changes that
the sou..., you know, that the "kṣetraṁ" undergoes? That He is describing in
this verse. You know. "vikāram" is change. "sa-vikāram udāhṛtam". You know. So,
what are the "vikāram" that the "kṣetraṁ" undergoes? "ic...", this is described.
"icchā dveṣaḥ". These attachment and aversion. And then, naturally, concomitant
with that is "sukhaṁ" and "duḥkhaṁ". So, that, which, for which we have "icchā".
Accordingly, we experience "sukhaṁ" in connection with that. And that, for
which, we have "dveṣaḥ", we experience "duḥkhaṁ" in connection with that. So,
you know, for when we get something, which, for which we have "icchā", we get
"sukhaṁ". And for that, which we have "dveṣaḥ". For example, say, I do not like
a particular sabji. And if that is the only sabji in the meal, I, my mouth will
turn in distaste. So, when I have "dveṣaḥ" for something, that leads to, when I
get that, there is "duḥkhaṁ". The simple example. There are, of course, many
bigger things which we may not like. And we get in life. So, you know, like now,
these are considered to be true, with the "vikāram" of "kṣetraṁ". How is that?
The soul, the seat, the source of consciousness is transcendental. That is
not a part of "kṣetraṁ". That the soul is "kṣetra-jñaṁ". But the, you know, the
analogy, which will come back again and again in this chapter, is the analogy
of a person watching a movie. You know. A person is watching a movie. You know.
The person is like the "kṣetra-jñaṁ". And the movie screen on which the, you
know, movie is being played. That is like the "kṣetra". So, now, at a, you know,
at a level of, you know, constituents or components, what is the "kṣetra" made
up of? You know. There has to be a projecting screen. There has to be projector.
There has to be the proper, you know, say, you know, acoustic arrangements. The
lighting arrangements. All that thing by which the attention will gravitate
towards the TV screen. So, all that is the background. But then, so, that is the
"kṣetra". That is the, you know, that is the area where that, you know, you
know, where that visual experience o..., audiovisual experience of the movie
will be, you know, will be created. So that it can be experienced by others. But
then, within the movie, what happens is, "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". So, you know, if
the hero and the heroine are embracing. Then, there is "icchā". And that leads
to "sukhaṁ". And then, the hero is being pound. Beaten up by the villain. There
is "dveṣaḥ". One does not want that to happen. Or the, the villain is chasing
after the heroine. There is "dveṣaḥ" for that. And that leads to "duḥkhaṁ". So,
"icchā". So, there is "icchā". And then, there is "dveṣaḥ". So, based on
whatever is happ..., so, this, consider "kṣetraṁ","vikāram". Because actually,
the changes are happening within the illusory framework of the, you know, movie
theater. You know. You know. Of the movie projection. On the screen. But they
have an effect. So, it is interesting. Further, He says that "saṅghātaś cetanā
dhṛtiḥ". "cetanā" refers to consciousness. Now, it is interesting that
consciousness is also s..., called as a, you know, "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". Now, we
know, consciousness does not come from matter. Consciousness comes from the
soul. There is a whole book of Srila Prabhupada. Which is titled as, which is
conversa..., which is conversation with a, you know, you know, a primarily
Bhaktisvarupa Damodar Maharaja. And other disciples, also. You know. Where,
which is called "Life comes from life". Where the primary focus is on
establishing how, you know, the source of consciousness is not matter. But
spirit. "Life comes from life". That is. As the name suggests. You know. Life
does not come from matter. So, you know, that being the case, then why is this
verse stating that, you know, "cetanā", which means conciousness, is a
"kṣetraṁ". "vikāram", is a, you know, transformation, is a tran..., a change. A
transformation of matter. You know. Because this is not talking about
consciousness per say. This is talking about consciousness projected within
matter. This is talking about consciousness as it is experiencing the virtual
reality. Or the movie reality. So, going back to the earlier example. The person
is watching in a movie theater. The person has, you know, the spectators have
their own consciousness. So, they can look around. Look left. Look bottom. But
right now, they are looking straight at the movie theater. And as they are
looking at the movie theater, what is happening? Their illusion, their whole
attention is focused on the movie theater. And their consciousness is projected
into that movie theater. And then, whatever changes are happening, they actually
have nothing to do with their original life. Their real life. Real life in terms
of, you know, the life which they have opp..., abouts at the movie theater. But
that is what they are experiencing right now.

So, like that, we have a different life. We have a life at the spiritual level
in relationship with Krishna. But unfortunately, we have forgotten that life.
And right now, we are focusing on an alternative life. What is that alternative
life? You know. It is not just an alternative. It is an illusion, actually. So,
and, you know, you know, you know, you know, it is, you know, it is a temporary
illusion which we have. And that, unless we are identifying with a particular
body. A particular family. A particular nationality. And then, we are
experiencing a set of emotions. So, the consciousness that we are experiencing
right not is a "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". It has got nothing to do with the original
purest consciousness of the soul. So, "saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ". "dhṛtiḥ" refers
to convictions. So, we also have certain convictions. This is good. This is bad.
You know. An Indian may think that Pakistani is a rival. And Pakistanis may
think Indians are rival. So, we all have certain, certain conceptions. Certain
convictions. So, all these are produced by "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". You know. So,
"sa-vikāram udāhṛtam". So, in this way, Krishna is describing the "kṣetraṁ".
And, and the "kṣetraṁ". So, this is a condense description of sankhya. Which is
given in the Thirteenth Chapter. You know. So, now, here, Prabhupada explains,
you know, you know, Prabhupada says:

"One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along with their
interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In Bhagavad-gītā, a
summary only is given."

You know. You know. You know. You know. So, sankhya is itself a whole complex
and, you know, developed belo..., philosophy. And a theistic version of sankhya
is explained in the, you know, in the Third Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". In the
"Teachings of Kapila". So, you know, you know, you know, you know, this theistic
sankhya is the sankhya wherein the idea of how ultimately the, you know, the
analysis of the twenty-four elements should lead us from matter to spirit. And
from, and within the renounced spirit, it should lead us to supreme spirit of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the understanding of theistic
sankhya. You know. You know. So, "summary only is given.", Prabhupada says. So,
Krishna's purpose here is not to exhaustively analyse sankhya. He is basically,
as we know in the Bhagavad Gita, there is a particular context. The context is
for Arjuna to understand what is it that He should do on the battlefield. That
is not just fight or not fight. Yes. Fight or not fight is the decision. Which
he has to take. But on, based on certain understanding. So, what is that
understanding? That understanding is that he is a part of Krishna. And as a part
of Krishna, he, it is best for him to act in harmony with Krishna. So, how will
he act in harmony with Krishna? By, you know, learning to love and serve
Krishna. And that, you know, learning to love and serve Krishna will be based on
the understanding that Bhagavan is the highest sadhya. And bhakti is the highest
sadhana. So, Krishna is analysing sankhya here. So, as to help Arjuna over a
period of time understand that the ultimate reality is, you know, that even
sankh..., that is bhakti. That even the analysis of sankhya leads to Bhagavan
as the highest reality. And bhakti as the best sadhana. That is what we have
talked about here. Now, after describing this "kṣetra". Krishna, in the next,
you know, five verses, will describe the twenty items of knowledge. So, this is
the, you know, you know, the longest set of verses that Srila Prabhupada puts
together. In the 20 to 23 also are five ver..., you know, 20, 21, 22, 23, there
are four verses which Prabhupada has put together in the Sixth Chapter. But that
is also actually 3.5 verses. Because the fourth verse is half. Which is, you
know, which he takes as one verse. And then, 24th verse, he makes us having six
lines. Six lines in English. Or three lines in sanskrit. So, generally, two
verses being put together happens quite, as sev..., several times. Three verses
being put together happens sometimes. But this is the only place in the whole
Bhagavad Gita, where Srila Prabhupada gives a combined purport for five verses.
And the reason for that is, you know, in one sense, you know, logical and sound.
Because, you know, these five verses are talking about one theme. And what is
that theme? That theme is, you know, about jnana. So, Arjuna has started with
questions. Let us look, you know, quickly go back a few steps to understand how
this chapter is progressing. So, we see here that, you know, you know, Arjuna
had asked six question about "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam". You know. "jñānaṁ".
"jñeyaṁ". And "puruṣaṁ". And "prakṛtiṁ". So, "kṣetraṁ" and "kṣetra-jñam", He has
answered the questions now. The "kṣetraṁ" is the body. And He has described in
ref..., His, He has described sankhya's analysis of the "kṣetraṁ". And then, He
has described "kṣetra-jñam", and the two "kṣetra-jñam"s. Atma. And Paramatma.
Now, He is going to "jñānaṁ". So, then, after that, will be "jñeyaṁ". So, let us
look at "jñānaṁ" now. You know. You know. You know. You know.

        amānitvam adambhitvam
        ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam
        ācāryopāsanaṁ śaucaṁ
        sthairyam ātma-vinigrahaḥ

So, we will look at one by one. The verses. It is significant that Krishna
begins this description with "amānitvam". "amānitvam" means humility. And
"adambhitvam" is pridelessness. Now, we may wonder. What exactly? Is there any
difference between "amānitvam" and "adambhitvam"? Yes. There is a significant
difference. "amānitvam" refers to the, "amānitvam" refers to, you know, you
know, you know, not to be proud when we have reason to be proud. And
"adambhitvam" means not being proud when we do not have reason to be proud. What
do we mean by that? You know. Sometimes, some people put on a facade to look
bigger than what they are. Say, if a person is a mill..., billionaire. And that
person says I am a billionaire. You know. You know. That is, you know, that is,
you know, you know, pride. But when a person is not a billionaire. And that
person claims I am billionaire. Then, that is "damba". That is hypocrisy in one
sense. So, when one, so, Krishna says, we, neither, you know, that means we
should not, you know, brag about what we have. And so, then, what to speak of
bragging about what we do not have? So, in general, people want to look big. You
know. They want to look big in the world's eyes. You know. I am so great. I am
so this. I am so that. They want to look big. You know. You know. And in order
to look big. They, what they try to do is, they try to avoid looking. You know.
They end up. And they try to look big. They end up looking small. Because when
people speak a lot about themselves. You know. I have done this. I have done
that. I am like this. I am like that. Then, what happens by these thoughts? When
people say, I am like this. I am like that. The end result of it is that those
people end up becoming, you know, you know, miserable. Why? Because they become
so dependent. So terribly, you know, they become afflicted by terrible sense of,
sense of inadequacy. And in a, and insecurity. Because they are always dependent
on others' praise. Others' recognition. Others' glorification. And without that,
they are, just have no shelter. No security. So, therefore, you know, you know,
those who aim to look big are small. They are small. They do not have any
self-security. Self-esteem. So, that is why they, they are actually in a
terrible predicament. So, "amānitvam adambhitvam". So, first thing, Krishna says
is humility. Kena Upanishad also says: one who thinks, he knows, does not know.
And one who knows, he does not know, knows. So, the idea is that a person does
not claim that I know everything. See, even hund..., a devotee knows Krishna, a
devotee understands that there is so much more to know about Krishna. So, that
is why a devotee never claims that I know Krishna entirely. You know. In fact,
even Arjuna says that Krishna, only You know.

        svayam evātmanātmānaṁ
        vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama
        bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa
        deva-deva jagat-pate

So, Krishna told Arjuna after the Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita that, actually,
after Krishna spoke Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita. Then, when Krishna, you know, 
Arjuna was summarising his understanding. He says, Krishna, only You know
Yourself. "svayam evātmanātmānaṁ". That You alone know Yourself. Nobody else
knows You. "vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama". "vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama". That You alone
know Yourself. And nobody else knows You. So, in this way, what Krishna is
essentially telling Arjuna is that, you know, you know, sorry, you know, you
know, you know, what, you know, what Arjuna is telling Krishna is that actually
that nobody knows me. You know. Nobody knows You. And even Krishna says that,
actually, "prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha". When I tell My vibhutis, also, I will tell
principle. Because "nānto ’sti vis...":

        nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ
        vibhūtīnāṁ paran-tapa

That, actually, My vibhutis are unlimited. So, even for our spiritual knowledge,
we should not be proud. What to speak of our material iden..., material
knowledge? "amānitvam adambhitvam". And then, "ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam". "ahiṁsā
kṣāntir ārjavam" means, so, "ahiṁsā", as we know, is nonviolence. Now, actually,
these attributes, these twenty elements of knowledge, we have discussed them
once. Because Srila Prabhupada talks about them in the Isopanishad. When he is
talking, when he is talking about the vidya. Vidya section. Verses 9 to 11. So,
at that time, the Tenth Verse, Tenth Mantra of the Isopanishad.

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, when Krishna is talking about that, He talks about two things over there.
You know. You know. He talks about how, there is one result which comes from
vidya. Another result which comes from avidya. So, there, He talks about those
two results. And one of those results is that one gets the positive. You know.
That, so, there, when he is talking about vidya, Prabhupada conno..., connects
that vidya with the twenty items of knowledge. And he says that, vidya
essentially leads to development of all these virtues. So, at the end of this
set of verses, Krishna will say:

        etaj jñānam iti proktam
        ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā

That all this constitutes knowledge. And apart from that, everything else is
ignorance. So, Krishna describes knowledge in terms of, you know, you know,
virtues. Not in terms of items of information. You know. The technical knowledge
is important. But the technical knowledge alone is not important. The technical
knowledge alone is not important. Because, you know, you know, you know, the
technical knowledge has got nothing to do with the character of a person. You
know. A person may be a very good engineer in terms of making, you know, making
good houses. Or making good, you know, bridges. Or whatever. That person is
civil engineer. Or good cars. And planes. If that person is, you know,
mechanical engineer. Or pneumatics engineer. Or whatever. But that ha..., that
has no reflection on the character of the person. Because when the person
studies engineeing, that does not lead to, that does not lead, you know, that
education does not contain anything about, you know, character development. So,
even within scien..., even education, there is humanities. And there is
sciences. These are two broad divisions. Of course, commerce is one more
division. But humanities is a broad division. And humanities, there is
literature. There is, you know, art. There is poetry. And all these things come
up. So, you know, you know, you know, to some extent, humanities talks about the
finer aspects of the human being. And sciences talk about the, you know, you
know, aspects of nature which we can control. And which we can change hopefully
for our better ma..., our benefit. But either way, most of the knowledge that is
there in today's, you know, educational scenario. That does not focus much on
character development. It focuses primarily on earning. So, you know, you know,
you know, the purpose of education is not just to earn a living. The purpose of
education is to actually develop character. So:

        amānitvam adambhitvam
        ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam

So, we will see. All these, that are talked about, are qualities. "ahiṁsā" is
nonviolence. So, let us look at what Srila Prabhupada says about each of these
qualities. The first thing is that Srila Prabhupada says over here is that, you
know:

"This process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent men as
being the interaction of the field of activity."

That means some people think of this also as the "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". Which
Krishna has talked about in the previous verse. Sixth and Seventh. But he says,
this is not "kṣetraṁ". "vikāram". This is the way from, this is the, you know,
path of "kṣetraṁ". "vimukti". You know. You know. You know. You know. One has to
get liberated from "kṣetraṁ". For that, this process is requir..., used. But
actually, this is the real process of knowledge. So, this is, Pra..., as
Prabhupada further mentions:

"This is actually the means to get out of the entanglement of those elements." 

We are not studying the elements. We get out of these elements. So, Prabhupada
explains that all these elements are important. We will come back to the upper
part. Let us recite the ve..., all the verses first. You know. You know. You
know. So:

        indriyārtheṣu vairāgyam
        anahaṅkāra eva ca
        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
        duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam

        asaktir anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ
        putra-dāra-gṛhādiṣu
        nityaṁ ca sama-cittatvam
        iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī
        vivikta-deśa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-saṁsadi

        adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ
        tattva-jñānārtha-darśanam
        etaj jñānam iti proktam
        ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā

So, here, Krishna is describing. "etaj jñānam iti proktam". All this is
"jñānam". And apart from that, whatever is there is "ajñānaṁ". "ajñānaṁ yad ato
’nyathā". So, what all is He describing over here? As Prabhupada mentions in the
purport that among all these, the most important element is:

        mayi cānanya-yogena
        bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī

"mayi cānanya-yogena". So, you know, you know, you know, you know, actually, you
know, the Hi..., you know, unalloyed devotional service to Krishna. So, now,
this, Krishna is talking about "jñānam" over here. So, within "jñānam", one
element is described as bhakti. So, actually, this is just one element from the
perspective of the "jñāni"s. As we know, the "jñāni"s also practice bhakti. We
will discuss about the yoga ladder in its technical details a la..., in a
little later class. But the important point right now is, you know, you know, to
understand that even the "jñāni"s have to practice bhakti at some level. Only
when they practice bhakti, by which, that, that they get realisations. And then,
they get elevation. Liberation, also. Bhakti has to be there in all processes.
So, here Krishna is talking about "jñānam" sadhana. And even the "jñāni"s have
to develop certain qualities. And of course, you know, these qualities can also
be, you know, they can, they are also helpful on the path of devotion. And that
is why we, Prabhupada explains to us in terms of how a devotee can understand
and develop these qualities. You know. You know. You know. So, generally
speaking, in, when we get a disease. First of all, there is a visible symptom.
Ok. It, ok, I am feeling some pain in my stomach. And then, when I feel pain in
the stomach. That, that is just the visible. You know. That is not, not just
visible, I would say. Perceivable symptom to us. That, that is what is tangible.
Or perceivable to us. But then, there are X-rays. And there may be CT scans.
And there are other things. We say, ok, that pain in the stomach is because of a,
say, appendix problem. And then, then, there is a treatment. So, then, there may
be a set of complications. Ok. The, my appendix has grown too big. Or it is
being moved. Its position has become this. Or it has become infected. Or
whatever. So, now, these are not some things which can be perceived immediately.
They are some thing which, you know, we need a Jnana Chakshu to perceive. The
Jnana Chakshu here refers to not philosophical Jnana Chakshu. But the medical
Jnana Chakshu. You know. The doctor has to use, you know, the technical
instruments as well as the technical, you know, knowledge to understand that.
And then, after that, you know, there is a progression. There is a solution.
What is the solution? Maybe, you have to do a surgery. And cut the appendix. So,
that means, there is first a, just like there is an iceberg. You know. When
there is a huge iceberg that is floating. So, often, just one to..., small part
of the iceberg is above the ground. Above. Sorry. Above the water. And below
the water, there might be a giant iceberg. That is what happened when the
Titanic collided. So, what happened was the, there was a, guard was not alert.
And they saw this. And when they saw this iceberg, it was too late. The ship was
moving too fast. And they just could not wear off. And it was so big that they
just could not turn off. So, then, you know, iceberg, a small part of it is
above. But below that is the giant, you know, body of snow. It is almost like a
moving island. Or a moving mountain of snow. Boom. When the ship collided, there
was a tuck. The ship just rattled. And cracks. And then, crumbles. And drowns.
So, like that. What essentially happens over here is that when we see, when I
have a disease. Then, there is one tangible symptom which I see. You know. For
example, I may find that I have 35:46
