Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoYyr2Q1ftI
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 18th Chapter. We will look at the happiness in the three modes. And
then, we will go on to talk about how the Vedic programme of karma-yoga. And
then, bhagavad arpit karma-yoga. And bhakti-yoga, you know, through jnana-yoga,
helps one to transcend from the arena of the modes to, you know, beyond the
modes. So, let us look at happiness in the three modes. You know. You know. So,
to go back, you know, the analysis, still now, you know, you know, we talked
about "jñānaṁ". "karma". And "kartā". In, in two classes earlier. And then,
"buddhiḥ". And "dhṛtiḥ", we talked about in our previous class. So, now, we come
to "sukhaṁ". You know. You know. So, the connection is that, you know,
ultimately, all action that we do, it is, we are aiming for the "phala". The
fruit of act..., the action is happiness. So, you know, happiness itself can be
in different modes. And let us look at the happiness in different modes. You
know. You know. "sukhaṁ". So, 36th verse.

        sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ
        śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha
        abhyāsād ramate yatra
        duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati

"sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ". So, "tri-vidhaṁ". Of three kinds. "sukhaṁ".
Happiness. "śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha". Oh, "bharatarṣabha". Oh, son of, son of
"Bhārata". There are these three kinds of happiness. "abhyāsād ramate yatra".
You know. That by practice, sometimes, one eng..., engages in this happiness.
And "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". You know. "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati" means that,
sometimes, one, you know, comes out of misery. You know. "duḥkha". "antam". That
means the end of, you know, misery. The end of misery. So, you know, Krishna is
saying in the first part of the verse.

        sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ
        śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha

That three, hea..., hear, hear, oh, Arjuna, about three kinds of happiness. And
He gives a generic overview of the three kinds of happiness. By telling that,
you know, sometimes, you know, "abhyāsād ramate yatra". That by, that,
sometimes, the living entity engage..., eng..., enjoy this happiness. "ramate".
And sometimes, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". You know. That, you know, the, you
know, c..., living entity comes out of all misery. Attains the end of all
sorrow. "duḥkha". "antam". You know. So, earlier, Krishna has talked about:

        antavanta ime dehā

That the body is temporary. And then, He has talked about how, you know, you
know:

        ādy-antavantaḥ kaunteya

So, you know, He has talked about, first "antavanta ime dehā", He talks about in
2.18. And then, 5.22, He talks about how material pleasure has a beginning. And
an end. And then, He has talked further about in the Seventh Chapter, the, how
the fruits of demigod worship are also temporary.

        antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ
        tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām

So, "antavat". Temporary. Or ending. That which has an end. That which is
temporary. So, the, Krishna has talked about various things that are
temporary. But here, He is talking about, you know, not just temporar...,
temporariness. He is talking about, you know, termination. Complete ending. The
termination of what? The termination of misery. So, how will this misery become
terminated? By the practice of, m..., m..., you know, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca
nigacchati". So, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura gives an alternative
explanation of this. He says that, so, basically, you know, you know, he
connects the second part of this verse, you know, the verse has four parts. A.
B. C. D. So, second part means C and D.

        abhyāsād ramate yatra
        duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati

So, he connects this with the next part. Next verse. Which is, 37th verse talks
about happiness in the mode of goodness. So, he says that, happiness in the mode
of goodness has to be cultivated. And "abhyāsād ramate yatra". That, actually,
this happiness does not come automatically. It has to be cultivated. One has to
practice it. "abhyāsād ramate yatra". That by "abhyāsāt", by practice, one will
start delighting in the happiness. And then, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". So, it
is not that any and every happiness can bring the end of misery. There may be
some temporary relief. You know. You know. Sometimes, when people feel that, too
many problems. That they drink a bottle of liquor. Now, they think, you know,
they may not think literally. But their idea is that the solution to the problem
is from, that the bottom of a liquor bottle. No. At the bottom of a liquor
bottle, there is no solution to a problem. Actually, there is only worsening of
the problem. So, there may be a, there may be, seem to be like a "duḥkhāntaṁ".
Drown away all your misery, you know, in liquor. But no. Liquor makes things
worse. It makes a person suffer more than what the person was suffering earlier.
So, it is not a solution. It is an aggravation. So, therefore, "duḥkhāntaṁ ca
nigacchati". If one truly wants the "antam" of "duḥkha", the only way to do that
is by going beyond the material modes. Because as long as one is in the realm of
matter, you know, one will be encountering temporary things. And that is going
to cause suffering. "duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati". "duḥkha", "antam" will come when
one goes beyond the arena of matter. And to go beyond the arena of matter, one
has to practice. So, you know, you know, one cultivates happiness in goodness.
And after our goodness, one goes to transcendence. Now, in some ways, the
happiness in goodness and is transcendence is similar. And in some ways, it is
different. Let us understand this first by looking at happiness in goodness.
And we, there, we will look about, this con..., our concept, concept of
"abhyāsād ramate yatra" a little bit more. So, you know:

        yat tad agre viṣam iva
        pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam
        tat sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam
        ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam

"yat tad agre viṣam iva". That which in the beginning tastes like poison. But in
the end, "pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam". But which in the end taste like nectar. "tat
sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam". That happiness is in the mode of goodness. "sukhaṁ
sāttvikaṁ proktam". And its characteristic is "ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam".
"ātma-buddhi". "ātma-buddhi" means, you know, spiritual, you know, intelligence.
"ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam". So, "prasāda-jam" is born of. So, actually,
Prabhupada trans..., "prasāda", born of the satisfaction. And, actually, what
will, happens is, Prabhupada translate this as, you know, in the word to word,
he translates it as born of the satisfaction. In the sentence, he translated as,
as which awakens one to spiritual realisation. So, you know, you know, what
happens is that when one practices spiritual life. By the practice of spiritual
life, one moves forward from materialism to spirituality. And when one moves
forward from materialism to spirituality, one starts, you know, delighting at
the spiritual level. And to the extent, one starts delighting at the spiritual
level, to that extent, one becomes free, you know, sit..., more and more
situated on the spiritual, one's intelligence becomes spiritually inclined.
One's intelligence becomes spiritually situated. So, that is the meaning of
"ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam". "ātma-buddhi". Spiritual intelligence. And, you know,
actually, you know, for a child, for example, you know, you know, stu..., you
know, playing is natural. Whereas studying requires application. Requires
discipline. So, the child may not want to study at all. May feel bored. Oh. I
do not want to do this. It is so troublesome. But then, you know, a child has,
sometimes, the parents have to force the child to go to school. And then,
finally, the child goes to school. And when the child goes to school, then what
happens? You know. There, the child, the teacher asks. What is your name? And
child tells the name. And says, do you know how to spell your name? And then,
the, say, the child is small. He says no. You tell me. And the teacher tells how
to spell the name. Oh. This is so nice. Now, I can spell my name. And the child
starts getting the joy of learning. And as the joy of learning starts rubbing
off on the child. Then, the child, child becomes more and more eager. Let me
learn more. And more. And more. And in that way, the child starts relishing a
higher happiness. So, similarly, in spiritual, you know, in goodness, also, you
know, you know, initially, there may not be pleasure. But as one moves forward,
one starts experiencing higher pleasure. So, one starts experiencing the higher
pleasure. So, that higher pleasure is talked about as "pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam".
"pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam" means that which is the result. The result. "pariṇāme" is,
you know, you know, happiness. So, now, for example, another example could be
treatment. When we take any particular treatment, at that time, it is not
initially pleasurable. But if we take the treatment, then we become cured. And
then, we experience the higher happiness thereof. So, the word "pariṇāme" is
important. "pariṇāme", you know, ro..., can, it actually means result. So, the
result is, ultimately, you know, "sukhaṁ". Or "amṛta". So, it tastes like poison
in the beginning. Sometimes, if I have, somebody has a bitter medicine to take.
So, that bitter medicine is, you know, not palatable at all. In fact, the very
word bitter is the opposite of palatable. Antonym. But then, you know, you know,
you know, that, you know, what happens is, by that bitter medicine, our health
improves. Medicine is properly pre..., prescribed. And taken. And properly
adminstered. Then, what, you know, the bitter medicine may be better. But the
effect is, irre..., result is good. So, like that, you know, you know, "amṛ...",
"agre viṣam. "pariṇāme". "amṛta". You know. Now, actually, this appl..., now,
does this also apply to spiritual happiness? If we see, his, with respect to
spiritual happiness, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, in the "Śikṣāṣṭakam", mentions that
"pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". This is "prati-padaḿ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, He says that,
this happiness, in sankirtan, is "prati-padaḿ". Means that at every moment. At
every "padaḿ". That each step. How is it? "pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". "pūrṇāmṛtā". It
is complete nectar. You know. "prati-padaḿ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, He is,
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is not talking, here, about, say, in the beginning poison.
And late, nectar. He is saying, actually, it is complete nectar. That this is of
course, you know, you know, at a later stage. In the "Śikṣāṣṭakam", the, you
know, various effects of sankirtan that are described:

        ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaḿ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaḿ
        śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaḿ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

So, like that, as the various effects are described. "sarvātma-snapanaḿ".
"prati". "vijaya...", "paraḿ vijaya...", "prati-padaḿ", "prati-padaḿ
pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, like that, all this "paraḿ vijayate śrī-...",
"-sańkīrtanam". So, now, this is the, one of the last results. "prati-padaḿ
pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaḿ". So, actually, this is, at the spiritual level, you know,
the, spiritual, actually, the whole process is constantly ecstatic. The
reciprocation of love. The engagement in service. It is all profoundly ecstatic.
Until we come to the spiritual level, things may not be ecstatic. That, that
till then, it is a sadha..., it is a struggle. As sadhakas, we have to go
through that struggle. And when we go through that struggle, it is not easy. But
once we come to the sadh..., "siddha" level, then there is no "agre viṣam". And
"pariṇāme". "amṛta". It is completely "amṛta". But, you know, Rupa Goswami, in
the Upadesamrta, also gives the example of the medicine. He says:

        syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy avidyā-
        pittopatapta-rasanasya na rocikā nu
        kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā
        svādvī kramād bhavati tad-gada-mūla-hantrī

So, he says that, you know, you know, you know, "kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy
avidyā-". "avidyā". "avidyā" means ignorance. So, when we are covered over by
ignorance, it is like the tongue is affected by our disease. You know. And being
like jaundice. Because of which, one cannot taste the sweetness of sugarcane
jui..., juice. Our sweet things like sugarcane juice, say. So, similarly, we
cannot taste at our stage the sweetness of the holy name. And the sweetness of
Krishna. But as we become purified, we will be able to taste the sweetness of
Krishna. That is what is required. So, "ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam". So, Chaitanya
Maha..., so, Chaitanya, what Chai..., Rupa Goswami indicates, it is a more
specific example of the principle that is talked about over here. So, there are
now, for example, like the, it, the explanation of happiness in, through
learning. Through studying. You know. Now, in general, that is in goodness. That
is not necessarily transcendental. Or eternal. But that nature of poison in the
beginning, and nectar in the end, that applies to happiness in goodness. And
that also applies for happiness in transcendence. So, as sadhakas, you know, we
should not always be in the pleasure-searching mentality. You know. If at all,
we have to be in name, any searching mentalities, it is service-searching
mentality. Now, how can I serve Krishna? Whatever be the situation, Krishna, You
put me in, how can I serve You in that situation? And that service-searching
will enable us to move forward. And will enable us to stay or progressing in our
life. Because whatever the situation comes in, it is not that in all situations,
we can experience pleasure. But in all situations, we can certainly render
service. We may not be able to render service in a specific way. But we can
rend... service in some other way. In some way or the other, we can always
serve. At the very least, we can chant. Or we can remember Krishna internally.
So, service-searching mentality can help us to become elevated. So, "pariṇāme
’mṛtopamam". Now, you know, should we be looking forward to the "pariṇāme" of
"amṛta"? So, should we be looking forward for taste? For example, ruci. Ruci
refers to taste. So, when we talk about taste, what kind of taste are we
referring to? It is not just the taste that we get through bhakti. Ruci is one
of the nine stages in bhakt..., in the progression of bhakti from sraddha to
prema. As is talked about in "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, in this progression,
ruci is one of the advanced stages. So, it is not just that we are getting
pleasure at that level. Actually, we are giving pleasure to Krishna through our
service. And when we give pleasure to Krishna, naturally, we get pleasure by
that. You know. You know. You know. So, our i..., plea..., focus is always on
service. And the more we serve Krishna, the more we get pleasure in serving
Krishna. Because our service pleases Krishna. And then, Krishna in reciprocation
fills our heart with service. Fills our heart with pleasure. So, we focus
primarily on serving and pleasing Krishna. And naturally, we get a taste through
that as we become spiritually advanced. And we become pure-hearted. So,
initially, we practice bhakti as a discipline. Knowing that, ok, ultimately, you
know, it will take me to the spiritual level where I will please Krishna. And
then, that will bring me pleasure, also. So, it is a natural result of, you
know, purification. That we will get satisfaction, also. So, our goal is not our
satisfaction. Our goal is ultimately Krishna's satisfaction. But through
Krishna's satisfaction, we get satisfaction ourselves, too. Let us look at mode
in, you know, a happiness in the mode of passion, now. So, you know, you know,
you know, the nature of happiness in the mode of passion is, you know, you know,
the "viṣaya" and "amṛta" gets interchanged as compared to goodness.

        viṣayendriya-saṁyogād
        yat tad agre ’mṛtopamam
        pariṇāme viṣam iva
        tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam

You know. So, "viṣayendriya-saṁyogād". So, when there is contact between the
senses and the sense objects. And by this "saṁyogāt", by this contact, what
happens? You know. "yat tad agre ’mṛtopamam". There is "amṛta" in the beginning.
There is nectar in the beginning. And what is the "pariṇāme"? "pariṇāme" is
"viṣam". Is poison. You know. "tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam". This is happiness in
the mode of, you know, you know, you know, passion. You know. So, you know, you
know, you know, Krishna has already talked about in the 14th Chapter.

        rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham

He says the result of "raja-gun...", practi..., li..., living in raja-guna is,
"phalaṁ duḥkham". The "phalaṁ" is "duḥkham". So, "yat tad", "agre", you know,
you know, "viṣa", "tad agre ’mṛtopamam". Now, Krishna makes, you know, that the
nature of s..., passionate pleasure is quite clear. When He says that they taste
like, they are, they result from the contact of the senses with the sense
objects. So, in this world, say, there are some good, you know, you know, foods
which look very good. And which taste very good. So, people eat it. So, then,
they eat. And eat. And eat. And then, it is "agre ’mṛtopamam". It is like nectar
in the beginning. But what happens eventually? You know. We cannot, our, our
digestive capacity is limited. So, we try to eat. And enjoy. But the capa...,
be cap..., digestive capacity being limited. Eventually, the result is that, we
get bloated. And that our stomach gets bloated. We get indigestion. We get, we
may get constipation. Or there are different kinds of problem we get. So, you
know, you know, actually speaking, the result is end, and the end result is that
there is misery. "pariṇāme viṣam iva". So, "viṣayendriya-saṁyogād". So, ok, the
tongue comes in contact with some delicious object. But the end result of that
is, you know, you know, "viṣaya", you know, you know, "pariṇāme viṣam iva". End
result is "viṣam". So, that is not at all, you know, a desirable kind of
happiness. Although, the whole world glamorises this kind of happiness. This
happiness is actually undesirable. You know. In the Ramayana, when Lord "Rāma" is
very grief-struck because of abduction of Sita. While consoling him, you know,
"Hanumān", "Sugrīva", and the "Vānara"s, they are talking. And they say that,
actually, at that time, "Sugrīva" says that, you know, "Rāvaṇa" can no more
enjoy Sita than can a person digest poison in food. Sometimes, there is the,
food is looking very delicious. It is opulent. It is very attractive to look
at. So, yeah. Oh. Wonderful food. And I can eat it. You know. When, as long as I
am eating it, it looks very nice. Oh. And some others meaning, also. This person
is eating so much. He is enjoying so much. But if that food is poisoned, you
know, I can eat it. But I cannot digest it. Once it goes inside, it start
burning me inside. And it 20:04
