Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2TuJUkGojc
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=I2TuJUkGojc&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_131_-_Bhagavad_Gita_16.01-16.06_-_The_godly_qualities_that_lead_to_liberation_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=c-o8MY9ygDmd6TTDYD4g88MBwxd8MTU0ODQ4OTgyN0AxNTQ4NDAzNDI3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now going to start with the 16th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. This is
"Daiva Asura Sampada Vibhaga Yoga". "The Divine and Demoniac Natures". So,
Prabhupada gives a simpler translation. "The Divine and Demoniac Natures".
"Daiva Asura Sampada Vibhaga Yoga". That is the sanskrit name. You know. The,
san..., you know, you know, sa..., sa..., "Sampada Vibhaga". "Sampada" means,
you know, which is "Sampada" is related with the word "Sampatti". You know. You
know. Health. You know. Wealth. So, "Sampada" means actually, you know, you
know, you know, this is what they consider to be the wealth. You know. The
demoniac consider the demoniac qualities their wealth. We will see the list of
demoniac and godly qualities. The, ungodly, the demoniac, they think that,
actually, you know, the, you know, arrogance. Harshness. These are their
strength they think. They think this is the treasure. The, this is the last,
they think, ok, this is good. You know. This is, I want to ge..., have this more
and more so that I can enjoy. So, that is demoniac. And that is what is, you
know, their wea..., f..., considered to be wealth. So, this is "Vibhaga". You
know.  The divine considers certain things to be the wealth. The demoniac
considers certain qualiti..., things to be the wealth. And these qualities, they
become so ingrained in them that they become a part of their nature. That is why
"Sampada Vibhaga". So, what we consider our, as our wealth, we will hold it
close to us. And eventually, that will become a part of us. And that will become
us. That will become our nature eventually. That is how the divine and demoniac
natures. That is the title. Now, again, this is, this chapter is like the 15th
Chapter. And the 14th Chapter, also. Where Krishna speaks without any prompting
from Arjuna. So, Krishna has, you know, taken the thread of thought of
explaining how, how "jñāna" leads to bhakti. Based on the question that Arjuna
asked in 13.1. And Krishna pursues that theme. Now, in the 14th Chapter, Kri...,
Arjuna has asked one question about how one can, you know, three questions.
Basically, in one verse, he asked. In, you know, you know, 14.21. He asked about,
you know, what are the characteristics of a person who has transcended the
modes? You know. What is the behavior of such a person? And what are the, what
is the process to transcend? After that, he has not asked any question. So, the
link between 15th and 16th Chapter is based on e..., the understanding of the
upside-down tree. So, you know, we discussed in 13.22 that the "bīja" is what?
"puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi". That the living entity is situated in material
nature. And what is the, the covers that that makes the living entity situated?
"bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān". The desire to enjoy material world. "bhuṅkte
prakṛti-jān guṇān". You know. And then, you know, you know, in this tree, we
discussed that what waters the tree is the modes. So, the tree is, so the, the
tree was speci..., explicitly mentioned in the 15th chapter. But the mentality
which causes that, you know, tree to sprout is the "bhuṅkte". The desire to
enjoy. And it is nourished by the three modes of material nature. Which were
described in 14th Chapter. The 15th Chapter describes the upside-down tree. And
how one can become disentangled from it by taking shelter of "puruṣottamaḥ".
Worshipping "puruṣottamaḥ".

Now, 16th Chapter describes the upper and the lower aspects of, lower extremes
of the tree. Now, the tree is upside-down. So, "ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham". So,
the upper part of the tree is nearer to the root. That is the "Brahmāloka",
Pra..., is, now, the word "Brahmāloka" can sometimes mean "Brahmāloka". The
spiritual world. "Brahmā" can mean spirit. And "loka" is the world. So, then,
"Brahmāloka" refers to the spiritual world. But "Brahmāloka" can also refer to
abode of Brahmaji. You know. You know. Which is also called as "Satyaloka". So,
you know, you know, now, here, we are referring to the "Sat...", you know,
"Brahmāloka" as "Satyaloka". The, the abode of "Brahmā". That is in the material
world. So, that is the upper expe. And then, there are the lower, lower, lower,
then, in ma..., then, it, as we told, downwards, downwards, there is Svarga. And
there is the human, you know, level. And below that, there is the hellish
lev..., hellish planetary systems. So, when we describe it thus, this, you know,
descending level. So, in this descending level of hierarchy, the primary and
important thing is to recognise that, you know, there are, that the divine are
situated in upper part of the tree. And the demoniac are in the lower part of
the tree. So, this sort of differentiation helps us understand that, you know,
we have to move upward. Upward. And ultimately, come out of this tree. And then,
go back to the, you know, re..., from the reflection to the reality. So, in this
particular verse, the, in the beginning, so, Krishna describes the, you know,
demo..., divine nature. So, actually, the divine, He describes only in three
verses. And the rest of the chapter, He is describing the demoniac nature. So,
let us look, we clear, the chapter overview. You know. You know. You know. You
know. And then, we will move forward. So, Chapter 16th. So, Krishna describes,
you know, divine qualities in verses 1 to 3. Then, after that, He describes the
demoniac qualities. You know. Then, divine and demoniac qualities are basically
described in 1 to 9. You know. Then, 10 to 18 describes the activities of the
demoniac. You know. Whatever qualities we have. Those qualities get reflected in
the activities that we do. So, the activities of demoniac are talked about. And
then, after that, you know, 19 to 22 talks about the consequences and causes of
demoniac activities. You know. You know. That what will be the result. And what
makes people do these demoniac activities. And then, you know, you know, chapter
concludes with, you know, you know, you know, outlining of the choices. Choice
that we have. Do we want to act in the divine way? Or the demoniac way? It gives
us a, you know, that, it gives us the choice. By telling us how to, if we want
to act in a divine way, how can we act in the divine way. So, let us look at the
first section. The first section talks about, you know, the divine qualities.
Now, here, also, Srila Prabhupada brings three verses together. Because the
focus is on divine qualities as a group. And Krishna gives them, the verses,
also, as a group. And at the end of the third world, He says a summary. Which
applies to, the similar language applies to all the previous three verses. So,
it is logical to group these verses together. Let us look at these three verses.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir
        jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ
        dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca
        svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam

        ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas
        tyāgaḥ śāntir apaiśunam
        dayā bhūteṣv aloluptvaṁ
        mārdavaṁ hrīr acāpalam

        tejaḥ kṣamā dhṛtiḥ śaucam
        adroho nāti-mānitā
        bhavanti sampadaṁ daivīm
        abhijātasya bhārata

You know. You know. You know. You know. So, "bhavanti". You know. All this is
"sampadaṁ daivīm". All this is the, you know, "sampadaṁ". The, you know, the
cha..., nature. The characteristic. The wealth. Of the "daivīm". And
"abhijātasya bhārata". So, those who are, you know, the, of the godly
disposition. Of the divine nature. They have these qualities from birth itself.
So, now, of course, you know, nature is also, nature is ju..., not just a matter
of something internal. Nature is also, you know, shaped by nurture and culture.
So, actually, you know, our behavior is shaped by these three things. Nature.
Nurture. And culture. Nature means how we are born with. All of us have certain,
certain tendencies. Certain psychophysical characteristics. Likes. And dislikes.
That are innate to us. That is. Innate means, innate not as the level of the
soul. But innate at the level of the body and the mind that we have. Based on
our previous karma. You know. So, that is nature. And then, there is, our
behavior is also shaped by nurture. Nurture means how we are taken care of in
the values with which our parents, you know, raise us. The, you know, you know,
you know, kind of environment, you know, in which we live in while we grow up.
And that, especially, in the initial ages, it is just the parents. The parents
create the environment. But as we move out, and even when we are in the parents.
Nowadays, there is TV. Which also affects a lot. But then, there is a larger
culture in which we live. Culture also refers to association. Including
association. So, that also shapes our behavior in a significant way. So, there
is nature. Nurture. And culture. Of course, beyond that, there is a free will.
So, all these shape our behavior. But they do not, they do not cu..., absolutely
determine our behavior. We can still use our free will. And choose to act
differently. So, this system is not fatalistic. This analysis. So, actually, it,
it is not completely deterministic. There are different, there are choices. You
know. Two twins may have the, genetically, the identi..., you know, identical
genetic pole. Especially, if they are monozygotic. That means they are born from
the same zygote which has split later. So, they have identical genetics makeup.
But still, they have different behaviors. They have different mood. Different
dispositions. And even if they are, they, even if their parents take care of
them in similar ways, still, over a period of time, they grow up differently.
So, why is that? Because beyond nature, beyond nurture, and beyond culture, we
are all individuals. And as individuals, we have free will. And we are souls who
ha..., originally have the spiritual individuality. And now, when we come to the
material world, our original individuality is covered over. But still, we remain
individuals. So, that is why, actually speaking, our free will never goes away.
Our individuality never goes away. Nature, nurture, culture shape our behavior.
They do not determine our behavior. But here, when Krishna talks about these two
diffe..., these two, you know, the divine and demoniac nature, the focus of
talking these is, you know, to help us understand that this is the way, the
godly, the divine nature is the way to liberation. And the demoniac nature is
the way to bondage. And therefore, we should choose to act according to the
divine nature. Now, you know, you know, you know, you know, let us mo..., look
at these qualities. "abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir". So, you know, Srila Prabhupada
in his purport, actually, gives, you know, concise and exp..., you know, concise
and profound explanations of each of these qualities. You know. You know.
Prabhupada further describes the qualities. You know. You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. So, Prabhupada says about how, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know:

"To beget a child in a godly atmosphere is known in the Vedic scriptures as
Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra."

So, that is the way one can get a godly child. You know. You know.
"abhijātasya". So, you know, ultimately, you know, you know, every soul has free
will. But the parents can do the best, you know, to protect the child. Now,
protection is not just physical. Protection is also emotional. And spiritual.
And protection is emotional and spiritual means that, actually, at an emotional
level, the child should feel cared. And loved. And the spiritual level, the
child should be facilitated so that the child can make right choices. Throughout
the life. Choices that will take one closer towards Krishna. That will help one
to return to Krishna. So, that is what is desired. And one such a choice that
the parents can make for the protection of the child, even before the bi...,
birth of the child is with the "Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra". Where, where purifying
their consciousness, the parents can help to attract a pure-hearted soul towards
their, into their womb. And thereby, help them to go towards Krish..., help in
the, g..., help create the life journey. You know. Auspicious way. Right from
the beginning. Now, you know, "abhayaṁ". What is "abhayaṁ"? "abhayaṁ" is
fearlessness. So, fearlessness is, fearlessness is, as we have discussed earlier
that fearlessness does not comes by the absence of fear. It comes by the
presence of a cause that dwarves fear. You know. When we understand that there
is a reality. That there is a, there is a purpose. That, you know, that is so
fulfilling. That is so consuming. That is so dee..., you know, deep. That fear
becomes insignificant in front of it. So, that is how fear, fearlessness comes.
And Prabhupada explains what is that? By the awareness, you know, by the
awaren..., by, by the absorption in a cause. Now, how do we absorb ourselves in
a cause? We could, peop..., different people can have different causes. You
know. A patriot, you know, may, because of love for the nation. And the desire
for the, the, that, then the, and because of attach...., attraction to cause of
protection of the nation, may overcome the natural normal fear of bodily injury.
And be, and willingly go to fight a war. That is possible in some cases. Bu...,
you know, but, you know, that is not the highest cause. The highest cause, high,
the, you know, the highest cause is cause that pure devotion to Krishna. Because
that alone leads to eternal benefits for ourselves. For, and for others. And,
you know, f..., in that, we are, that fearlessness that a devotee has, comes
from the awareness of a presence that dwares the fear. That awareness of a
presence that dwarves fear is the awareness of Krishna. The more we become aware
of the presence of Krishna as the Supersoul in the heart, the more we will be
able to be fearless. Know, knowing that Krishna is always there with me. And
Krishna will protect me. When Krishna is there. And I am serving Krishna.
Whatever happens will be for my good. And Krishna will offer me all protection.
So, you know, you know, you know, that, so, you know, now, Prabhupada explain
that these godly qualities, you know, among them, "abhayaṁ" comes by awareness
of Krishna. As indwelling presence. And because Krishna is greater than the
greatest. So, no problem can be bigger than Krishna. And that is why while
remember, while remembering Krishna, we can become fearless. As it is sai...,
you know, as it is said. You know. You know. Do not tell Krishna how big your
problems are. Tell your problems how big Krishna is.

So, our problems. Our fears. When we remember how big Krishna is. Then the
problems become dwarfed. So, you know, you know, you know, we have to remember
Krishna that way. And "abhayaṁ". Now, Prabhupada explain that these various
qualities are there. They are as per the different varanas. So, "abhayaṁ". Of
course, now, all godly people have to have these qualities, you know, in
general. You know. But certain qualities are important for certain varanas. And
Prabhupada explains that systematically into the purport. So, "abhayaṁ"
especially is a quality of, you know, the quality that is to be cultivated by
sannyasis. Sannyasis, generally, you know, in this world, we get security by,
you know, through, having people around us. You know. If something happens to
me, others are there. They will take care of me. But sannyasi has to leave
everyone. And travel alone. So, that was the tradition. That sannyasi would
travel alone through the jungles. So, for that, "abhayaṁ". Sannyasi requires to
be fearless. And that fearlessness comes by taking shelter of Krishna. By
remembering, you know, Krishna's presence int..., internally. And taking shelter
of Krishna. So, the, that is a quality, specially important for bra..., you
know, you know, for sannyasis. And:

        abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir
        jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ

So, "sattva-saṁśuddhir". "sattva-saṁśuddhir" is, "saṁśuddhir" is purification.
"sattva" is existene. So, purification of one's existence. You know.
Purification. Purification means what? Now, there are many impurities that are
there. So, Srila Prabhupada focuses on the impurity of lust. So, how do we, you
know, you know, so, how do we free ourselves from by lust? You know. By, you
know, you know, by avoiding external and internal triggers. External triggers
are, you know, the association of the opposite sex. And internal triggers are,
you know, recollections of past indulgences. Or recollections, recollections of
memories of, you know, of sensual pleasures. So, that is why, you know, the
sannyasis are not meant to associate with women. You know. Closely. And Srila
Prabhupada gives the example how Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was so strict that that
even his female disciples would have, would offer obeisances to him from a
distance. So, the idea is that one has to focus on purification. You know. So,
purification of existence. "sattva-saṁśuddhir". And when we focus on
purification, by following certain rules and regulations. You know. The point
here is not to, you know, not to, you know, not to misogyny. It is not to hatred
of woman. Or something like that. The focus is on one's purification. So, you
know, you know, you know, in the, you know, you know, in the Vedic culture. The
brahmacaris are told, you know, not to, you know, have eye contact with women.
Now, of course, you know, there are, you know, so, now, what, the reason for
this is, sometimes, the women may fee..., find this very, very disturbing. Very
irritating. You know. You know. Talking with somebody. And you do not even look
at that person. That might fee..., appear very, you know, you know, it is, it
might appear offending, also. It might appear dehumanising. But that was the
sta..., that was the standard. And the purpose of the standard was not to
dehumanise at all. It was to respiritualise. You know. The idea is that, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, the idea i..., you know, the
id..., the idea, the reason for this particular injunction is that actually
there has to be, you know, there, you know, the, you know, you know, the, th...,
those who are in the renounced order, they are not meant to derive, you know,
pleasure, you know, through sensuality. And, you know, when a person, when a
soul is in the male body, the male bod..., the male body. And the male eyes get
pleasure in looking at the female forms. And especially looking at the female
face. And the female eyes. And, you know, you know, this is a, so, by, or
minimising eye contact, the idea is not to disrespect women. But it is to, the
idea is to help one, one to have a spiritual vision. You know. Not by looking.
But by, you know, even if there is some necessary service required by looking,
by having focus on, you know, the, you know, service. Without necessarily the
eye contact. Now, of course, as Kri..., you know, because we have, you know, we
have the modern society. And, you know, we have women who also, you know, you
know, you know, have been brought up in a different set of values. So, some,
now, so, in some cases, sometimes, you know, to avoid offending women,
some time, some people, you know, some renunciates, brahmacaris or sannyasis may
also have eye contact. And that is a matter of, you know, that is a matter of
courtesy. Which they may do it. So, either way, this may, some sannyasi, some
renunciates may avoid eye contact. Some renunciates may avoid, may, you know,
may have eye contact. But the important point is that we recognise that it is
not that when eye contact is avoided, it is not a matte..., meant to disrespect.
It is simply matter of pure, maintaining the purity. You know. And purification
of existence. It is, it is actually admi..., admission of humility. And
weakness. That, you know, I am not pure-hearted. And, you know, and there may be
contamination that may be resulting. And that is why to avoid the contamination,
you know, I am avoiding eye contact. But then, whatever service is to be done,
that, you know, you know, say, answering questions. Or whatever has to be done.
That, the sannyasis are ready to do that. So, either way, the point is, you
know, f..., beyond the specifics, there is general point that, sannyasis are
meant to focus on purification of existence. And that should not be, that focus
of purification of existence should not be misinterpreted on, misrepresented as,
as antipathy towards any particular gender. Or anything like that. You know. You
know. So, when Srila, look at, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. So,
Prabhupada talks about "abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir". And then, he talks from
"Chaitanya Mahaprabhu". And then, "jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ".
"jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ". Cultivation of knowledge. And, you know, in the
cultivation of knowledge, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada writes:

"Sannyāsī life is meant for distributing knowledge to the householders and
others who have forgotten their real life of spiritual advancement."

"their real life of spiritual advancement.". You know. So, what happens in
material life is that, material life is endlessly entangling. It is not just
entangling. But endlessly entangling. You know. One thing. Second thing. Third
thing. Fourth thing. Keeps come..., you know, keeps coming. And then, there are
loose ends. Loose ends means, ok, this has to be fixed up. This has to be fixed
up. This has to be fixed up. But what happens is the loose ends never end. You
know. I fix up one thing. And then, ten other things become unfixed. And I fix
those things. And then, ten other things become unfixed. And it just goes on.
And on. And on. Now, we are not meant to neglect material life. But nor are we
meant to neglect spiritual life. So, you know, you know, regular contact with
renunciates, those renunciates, especially, those renunciates who have
completely devoted themselves to, you know, you know, the, to pursuit of
transcendence. To the, to Krishna's service, that reminds those who are in the
householder life. Ok. This is an important part of life. And I have to focus on
this, also. So, if, you know, you know, you know, sannyasis are focusing e...,
exclusively on, primarily on this. Entirely on this. Then, at least, I have to
devote some time for this. So, that is how there is a, you know, reciprocation.
And sannyasis are also traditionally meant to beg. So, the begging is not
because they, they are beggars primarily. The begging is a means by which they
express their humility. You know. And the begging is also a means by which they
can, you know, get an opportunity to interact with the householders. And give
them some transcendental knowledge. So, "jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ". And then,
Prabhupada writes that, in case one i..., is taken to renunciation. But does not
have knowledge. Then, one should cultivate knowledge. And then, one can share
that knowledge with others. But either way, it is important to share knowledge.
Then, you know, you know, you know, you know:

        dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca
        svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam

So, "dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca". "dānaṁ" is charity. Charity is a very important
part of, you know, spiritual life, especially as, you know, the householders.
And in, the important point about charity is to recognise that charity is not
just an activity. Charity should not just be an activity. Charity should be a
mentality. And mentality is developed through the cultivation of a habit. So,
you know, that means, you know, you know, that, you know, the idea behind
charity is not to, you know, just give some charity. Yes. That is important to
give some charity. But the idea is that to develop the mentality of giving.
That, to develop the mentality of a giving, giving. And that is why we should
give regularly. Some people feel, ok, now, I am in a financial crunch. So, now,
I will not give anything. In the future, when I earn money, then I will give a
huge some. Yes. If we have money. And we can give a large sum, that is good. But
the important point is not the quantity of the sum. But the regularity. Why?
Because that creates the mentality of giving. Yes. I have to give regularly.
Regularly. Regularly. And a small amount. Or big amount. Of course. You know. We
should try to give as much as possible to Krishna. But the important point is
give regularly. Because that is a habit to be cultivated. That is why Krishna
clarifies charity. Now, we pu..., we put, put charity as an activity. And we
would consider charitable disposition as a quality. But Krishna is calling
char..., co..., charity itself as a, as a part of the, you know, godly nature.
You know. You know. The, the that the demoni..., divine nature. The grihast...,
the householders who have divine nature. They are charitably disposed. But
charity is their quality. So, you know, charity, as a quality, helps us to
develop the giving mentality. And then, when we have, you know, if we do not
develop that habit of giving, you know, then i..., i..., we may eventually have
a lot, also. But then, because the habit of giving is not there. So, when we
have a lot, then the mind comes up with a lot of, you know, a lot of demands,
also. Oh, we have to get this, also. We have to get this, also. We have to get
this, also. And then, people who postpone giving charity so that they can give a
lump sum in the future often do not give anything at all. Because the idea is
that, their habit has not been developed. The habit of holding on to the money
has been developed. And that habit perceives, you know, continues even when a
person does not have, you know, you know, you know, person can spare money to
give charity. That is why, you know, char..., charity should be focused on, is
a, you know, charity should be done as a habit. And then, "dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś
ca". "damaś" is sense control. You know. You know. Now, "damaś ca yajñaś ca".
You know. So, you know, you know, sense control refers to the capacity. You
know. Sense control is required for everyone. And it is also required for
householders. The idea is that, you know, even in household life, the purpose of
marriage is not just an arrangement for sense gratification. It is for helping
you know, both of them, to together move on towards Krishna. So, you know, you
know, you know, now, sexuality is a part of life. Sexuality is a part of our
humanity itself. You know. You know. As human beings, as embodied creatures,
sexuality is a part. But sexuality is one thing. And sexualisation is another
thing. Sexualisation means that we reduce everything to, you know, to sexual
terms, only. So, you know, you know, the marriage realisation, relationship
should not be, you know, reduced to sexualisation. It is not just an arrangement
for, you know, sexual gratification. It is actually an, you know, arrangement
for spiritual elevation. And gra..., over a period of time, you know, the
husband and wife, they come to a level. If they exp..., practic..., practicing
spiritual life seriously. You know. They start seeing each other. You know. Not
so much as males and females. Who will provide each other mutual gratification.
But they start seeing each other spiritually. As, as a partners in a spiritual
journey. As a fellow souls. Fellow devotees. Who are moving forward in the
spiritual journey. So, that is, so that requir..., you know, that sort of, you
know, to develop that sort of req..., vision, it requires self-control. "dānaṁ
damaś ca yajñaś ca". "yajñaḥ" is sacrifice. 27:00
