Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vaExYycsRUo
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. You
know. We are now in the part of the Bhagavad Gita which will take us from
karma-yoga through jnana-yoga to bhakti. So, in the previous class, we had
discussed about varnashram. And now, as we will move from how varnashram will,
you know, in the, after practicing ""bhagavad arpit" bhakti-yoga, one can move,
"bha...", "bhagavad arpit karma" yoga. That means doing karma-yoga. And
"sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". Doing it for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord, one
moves onwards to bhakti. So, this is, Krishna will talk about, how one will move
towards bhakti through the process of jnana. So, let us look at this, so, 49 to
53 describe jnana in brief. And then, 54 describes how jnana leads to bhakti.
You know. You know. And then, 55 explains how, you know, you know, pure bhakti.
Para bhakti takes us to Krishna. You know. So, 18.49:

        asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra
        jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥ
        naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ
        sannyāsenādhigacchati

So, "asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra". You know. "asakta-buddhiḥ". That means, "asakta"
is attached. "asakta" is detached. So, with detached intelligence.
"asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra". You know. You know. "sarvatra" means all living
beings. "jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥ". "jitātmā" is the soul who has conquered
material existence. "jitātmā", you know, it is, you know, having conq...,
sorry, it was not conquered material existence. "jitātmā". So, here, "ātmā"
refers to the mind. So, one who has conquered the mind. "vigata-spṛhaḥ".
"vigata-spṛhaḥ" is one who is detached. Free from material desires.
"naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ". By the practice of "naiṣkarmya". "siddhiṁ
paramāṁ". The supreme destination. The perfection. "sannyāsenādhigacchati". How
can, through "sannyāsa", "adhigacchati", one can attain. So, essentially,
Krishna is talking here about, He, He is talking about the detachment in three
different ways. First, He says "asakta-buddhiḥ". "jitātmā". And then,
"vigata-spṛhaḥ". So, through all this, He is talking about the detachment. Then,
that is the same point emphasis "sannyāsenādhigacchati". And "naiṣkarmya". So,
until now, in the, previously, Krishna was talking about "sva-karma". He was
talking about "sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya". You know. By practice of one's karma,
worship the transcendental Lord. But here, it, He takes us to another level.
Where He talks about "naiṣkarmya". You know. You know. You know. "naiṣkarmya"
means, He says that, one should know. One does not need to practice karma over
here. One gives up karma. One acts without, one acts, one gives up action. And
lives in not just renou..., the spirit of renunciation while doing action. But
actually, one renounces action entirely. So, this is also a valid path. And that
is talked about in the Bhagavad Gita at this level. In 18.49. "asakta-buddhiḥ
sarvatra". So, the idea is that, varnashram, you know, creates a platform for
transcendence. Varnashram in and of itself is not always transcendental. You
know. Varnashram, if it is done for the practice of, it is done for the purpose
of satisfying Lord Vishnu as is mentioned in the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". And in the
"Vishnu Purana". Other places. Especially, the, you know, scriptures that focus
on devotion. Therein, it talks about, you know, you know: 03:55
