Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b30c7X5kl3E
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_128_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.07-15.10_-_How_the_mind_integrates_sensory_inputs_and_causes_our_struggles_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=qxv74f5kltxsjRe7MY43uVxLlo98MTU0ODQ4OTc1MkAxNTQ4NDAzMzUy&event=video_description&v=b30c7X5kl3E

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 15th Chapter. Starting with verse 7. Let us look at the chapter
overview. Before we move forward. So, the first section we completed, attain
liberation by detachment. So, that was based on the, you know, you know, you
know, understanding of the upside-down banyan tree metaphor. And then, if one
does not attain liberation in this way. Then, one will have to, you know, un...,
you know, stay in bondage. And undergo transmigration. So, that is the section
from 7 to 11. You know. Sta..., so, the 7, so, 15.6 ended by saying that, yes,
this is the spiritual world. And the spiritual world is, you know, Krishna's
abode. It is self-luminous. And it is beyond, you know, it is once attained, one
does not come back from there. So, three characteristics were described in,
about the spiritual world. So, that, those three characteristics are glorifying
the spiritual world. After that glorification is done, now, it is told that, ok,
if the spiritual world, if that is the abode. That is where we belong. Then, why
is the soul, you know, here? So, that will be discussed in this verse. And the
soul's, you know, journey in the material world will also be discussed in
subsequent verses. You know.

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ
        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So, "mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke". That "mama", "aṁśaḥ". Krishna is telling that all
living beings, "jīva", you know, "jīva-loke". They are in the world of
conditional life. They are My "aṁśaḥ"s. And "jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ". You know.
They are eternally my parts and parcels. And:

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

That they are undergoing "karṣati". "karṣati" is struggling. And suffering. They
are struggling and suffering in, you know, this material existence. Bec...,
where? Because of what? "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". That the six senses which
include the mind. You know. That is the cause of their suffering.
"manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". So, you know, you know, now, this verse has two parts.
And both of them are important. And then, the combination of those two parts is
also important. So, A and B are telling a very important philosophical truth.

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

So, this is telling that, you know, the living entity is eternally a part of
Krishna. So, we are "aṁśaḥ". And we are "sanātanaḥ", "aṁśaḥ". So, this is
important. Because, you know, the impersonalists have the idea that we will
eventually become one with God. And we will merge in his existence. But here,
the verse very clearly says that we are "aṁśaḥ". We are parts. And how do one?
The part will, never becomes the whole. And the part is such a part that will it
merge? No. "sanātanaḥ". Earlier, also, it has been said that the soul is, you
know, you know, you know, can, soul cannot be cut by anything. So:

        acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam
        akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca

So, whatever material transformations happen because of the various elements of
nature. You know. Wind. Water. All those. They do not affect, you know, the
soul. You know. You know. So, so, that, if the soul is not cuttable, then that
means, if the soul is a part. It has always been a part. And it will always be a
part. Soul is not cuttable. The soul is not changeable. Then, if it is "aṁśaḥ".
Then, it will always be an "aṁśaḥ". So, that can be inferred even from the
earlier verses. But it is made even more emphatic. And unambiguous. By the word
"sanātanaḥ". So, we are "aṁśaḥ"s. And we are "sanātanaḥ". Eternally, the
"aṁśaḥ"s. And whose "aṁśaḥ"s? "mamaivāṁśo". That is also important. "mama".
"aṁśaḥ". It is not just a brahma "aṁśaḥ". You know. You know. You know. We are
not just, you know, we are not just sparks of spirit. We are a parts of the
spiritual person's, supreme spiritual person. So, sparks of spirit. You know.
So, the example sometimes is definitely given of how the Supreme Lord is like a
flame. And we are like sparks. So, that is gi..., you know, example that
illustrates the qualitative oneness of all living beings. But it does not
necessarily illustrate, you know, you know, anything more than that. It simply
makes the point that this is how the living entity, you know, how, this is how
we all exist. You know. In relationship with Krishna. In terms of qualitative
oneness. But the, the fire itself does not have any personal, you know,
personality directly. At least the way we perceive it. And, you know, you know,
the, fla..., similarly, the flame, also. The spark also does not have
personality. But when we talk about the supreme absolute reality, the absolute
reality is a person. Krishna has also said "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". "mattaḥ
parataraṁ nānyat". 10.8. 7.7. He has said there is no reality higher than Him.
So, "mama" is important over here. Krishna is saying that they are all My
"aṁśaḥ"s. Not just brahma "aṁśaḥ"s. Or brahma, you know, you know, you know, you
know, pa..., some, you know, some, you know, temporary, you know, emanations
from Brahman. Or something like that. No. They are My parts. And they are
eternally My parts. You know. The, and then, they are "jīva-loke". So, that word
"jīva-loke" is the connection with the, you know, next part. So, you know, the
first part ex..., expresses the philosophical truth. That, you know, you know,
this is the, you know, this world is a place o..., you know, that we are parts
of Krishna, eternally. It is, it is very strong refutation of mayavada. Now,
second part also contains a very important truth. You know. What is that?

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So, you know, "karṣati". "karṣati" is struggling and suffering. So, that is
itself an important truth. But that has been mentioned by Krishna earlier in the
Bhagavad Gita. "duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam", He has talked about in 8.15. And then,
again, in 9.33. He has said.

        anityam asukhaṁ lokam
        imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

So, the, and then:

        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
        duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam

He has also talked about in 13.11. So, that has been mentioned that "karṣati".
"prakṛti-sthāni karṣati". That this material world is a place of misery. So, and
the living entity is suffering over here. So, of course, the slightly more
emphasis. The earlier verses were talking about how material world is miserable.
And this verse is talking about how we are miserable over here. How the living
entity is miserable. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, but the
important point over here, the addition is:

        manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
        prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

So, the "karṣati". The struggle and suffering is happening because of the mind
and the senses. "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". So, you know, you know, so, normally,
the "indri...", "indriyāṇi"s are considered to be five. But in the Bhagavad
Gita, you know, you know, the, you know, "indriyāṇi"s are often groupped with
the mind. Even when Krishna was talking about sankhya. In 13.6. So, the, there,
also, He said "indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ ca". So, "daśaikaṁ". "daśaikaṁ" is eleven. So,
there, Krishna included in that eleven, the Karmendriyas. 5 Karmendriyas. 5
Jnanendriyas. And the mind. So, you know, you know, in general, in the Bhagavad
Gita's analysis, the mind is groupped as one of the senses. Even in the "Vibhuti
Yoga". 10th Chapter. You know. You know. You know. Krishna has said "indriyāṇāṁ
manaś cāsmi". That I am the mind among the senses. So, the mind is consider...,
is groupped along with the other senses. Generally, in the, you know, in the
methology of the Bhagavad Gita. In the nomenclature. And the taxonomy. The way
Bhagavad Gita classifies things. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, now, you know, "manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi". 08:08
