Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTQbwIggL88
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=p0XBV6mKElCYhYFMqDXi4FJsBNZ8MTU0ODQ4OTU1OEAxNTQ4NDAzMTU4&v=hTQbwIggL88&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_120_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.12-13.19_-_The_inconceivability_of_the_jneya_-_how_it_is_avijneya_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the middle of the Thirteenth Chapter. We discussed saying the twenty items of
knowledge. And we were discussing last, and, time the difference between
affection and attachment. So, affection refers to a natural emotional human
connection. Which has, which has, is there. And which has to be there. It is
vital for, you know, for relationships to exist. You know. When we are relating
with people. We have to relate with them as complete persons. We cannot say of a
person I love your soul. I do not care for your body. No. We care for, when we
care, we care for the complete person. There is a famous in..., statement when
Srila Prabhupada once, he was in Mayapur. It was his Vyasa Puja day. You know.
Devotees. Thousands of devotees were coming. And glorifying him. And offering
flowers. And obeisances. And one devotee was limping. You know. Slightly. And
Prabhupada asked him. You know. While all this arati was going on. Prabhupada
called him forward. And, you know, asked him what had happened. And he had
explained he had got some wound because of something. And then, Prabhupada,
there, during, while his Vyasa Puja offering, told him, Prabhu..., Prabhupada
gave him prescription of how to prepare some home-made medicine. By which, he
would cu..., he could cure, you know, the, you know, you know, you know, pain in
the leg. So, Prabhupada was concerned. You know. When, when he came to know that
in Mayapur, the devotees were not getting proper prasad. Prabhupada said, no,
prasad should be proper. So, now, the important point here to understand is that
the relationships have, now, of course, this is, we could say this is a
relationship between guru and disciple. And the guru is caring for even the body
of the disciple. But, you know, in general, all relationships, we cannot
separate the body, the mind and the soul. And when we take ca..., when we are
taking care, we have to take care of all three. The body. The mind. And the
soul. Protection means not just spiritual protection. Telling people. This is
right. This is wrong. You know. This is good for you. This is bad for you. No.
That is important. But along with that, you know, people should also feel
valued. People should feel cared. People should feel che..., in fact, cherished.
The success of our movement is, you know, very much dependent on how long, how
we can steadily inspire devotees to keep practicing devotional service
throughout their life. So, you know, they, once, person come to the shelter of
Krishna. You know. Taking care of the person who has come to the shelter of
Krishna is also important. So, that, that person can go on lifelong. And, you
know, feel cared. And inspired. So, often, the emphasis is on detachment, you
know, you know, from family members can have a negative effect in terms of
irresponsibility. You know. Detachment is not irresponsibility. See. We, we
discussed this briefly earlier. But, you know, detachment means, you know, a
lack of excessive emotional entanglement in material things. Whereas
irresponsibility means, you know, evasiveness. Means unwillingless to shoulder a
burden. Which is actually one's own. So, if a person is in, in family life.
Then, the person has to take care of the family. You know. There is a, you know,
you know, you know, you know, that one time, you know, the temple was
emphasising book distribution. And earlier, ISKCON was more of temple centered
communi..., not just, you know, congregation movement. It was, you know,
entirely a temple based movement. So, even the hou..., householder devotees
would stay in the temple. So, at one time, to increase the book distribution,
the devotee, the temple authorities told the devotees that, told the matajis
that, you know, you can just, you know, you di..., you know, distributing the
books of Srila Prabhupada is more important than taking care of your babies. And
then, mothers were very disturbed by that. You know. It is the fundamental
maternal instinct. And it is the need of every wom..., women to take care of her
child. And then, one mataji wrote a letter to Prabhupada. And Prabhupada, you
know, you know, wrote back a strong letter. He says, what is this strange
busi..., what is this, you know, strange thing? He said, you know, you are
mother. These are Vaikuntha children. You have to take care of those children.
And these children are gift of God. And then, so, Prabhupada wanted to avoid
both extreme. So, on one side, he did not want the mataji, you know, the,
especially, the matajis to neglect their home responsibilities for the sake of,
you know, missionary activities. At the same time, he also did not want, you
know, them to be restricted to home activities. And b...., be not allowed to
participate in missionary activities. There has to be balance. So, you know, you
know, you know, the same applies to the husband, also. The husband has to take
care of the family. Detachment does not mean that, you know, a one neglects
one's, you know, family members. You know. In, in needs. I..., there is
physi..., you know, emotionally. Or spiritually. So, you know, that means one
has to actually, you know, be as it is said, be affectionate. But not attached.
You know. Attached would mean that the, the, we may say that the dividing line
is not so easy to, you know, easy to discern. And that is correct. You know. It
is always a, it is not that we have to walk on the line all the time. Sometimes,
we may wander left. Sometimes, we may wander right. 05:30
