Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LmfrMnHyTRg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_125_-_Bhagavad_Gita_14.14-14.18_-_The_modes_and_reincarnation_-_progressive_and_regressive_trajectories_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=yms6ViOPQIKQSNwCoUc8jJvmLSt8MTU0ODQ4OTY3OEAxNTQ4NDAzMjc4&event=video_description&v=LmfrMnHyTRg

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. We discussed in the
previous section about how the mo..., modes are, are, can be understood from
their cha..., diff..., you know, characteristics which manifest when they, you
know, when one mode, subor..., you know, su..., when one mode predominates over
other modes. So, now, after this, Krishna will describe, you know, the, we have
discussed until 13. Now, we are discussing, now, verses 14 to 18. Effect of
conditioning by the modes. You know. So, 14, you know, 15 talks about the
long-term effect. In terms of what happens after death. The post death
destination. Then, 16th verse, He talks about the medium-term effect. In 17th
verse talks about the immediate effect. Then, 18th verse talks about the overall
direction of the post-mortem journey. You know. You know. You know. Let us look
at this discussion now.

        yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu
        pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt
        tadottama-vidāṁ lokān
        amalān pratipadyate

So, "yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu". At the time. "yadā". At which time? Whenever.
"sattve pravṛddhe tu". "sattve" is "pravṛddhe", is the earlier, the word, there
was used, was "vivṛddhaṁ". Here, "pravṛddhe". Both mean the same thing. When
"sattve" is stronger. At that time, "pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt". "pralayaṁ" means,
you know, death. "pralayaṁ" can mean destruction. It can refer to the final
destruction. At, of the universe that happens. You know. Final universal
destruction that happens at the, you know, you know, end of the lifetime of
Brahma. So, the word "pralayaṁ" can refer to death. The word "pralayaṁ" can also
refer to various other things. So, in the Bhagavad Gita, the word "pralayaṁ" is
used to refer to death. You know. It is, you know, used to refer again in the
16th Chapter, also.

        cintām aparimeyāṁ ca
        pralayāntām upāśritāḥ

So, you know, in 16.11 and 12, Krishna talks the..., about those peop..., the
ungodly, demoniac people, who make sense gratification as the only goal of their
lives. For those people, you know, you know, you know, you know, "pralayāntām
upāśritāḥ". Until the moment of death, there will be "cintām". There will be
anxiety. So, there, also, the word is used. "pralaya" for death. So, here, also.
"pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt". So, those who are "deha-bhṛt". The embodied souls. If
they die when the mode of goodness is prominent. Then, what happens?
        
        tadottama-vidāṁ lokān
        amalān pratipadyate

So, "pratipadyate", they will attain. What will they attain? You know. The
"amalān" planets. The spotless planets of the "uttama-vidām". "uttama-vidām" is
those who are the knowers. You know. "vidā". "vidām" is to, "vidām" is to know.
"uttama" is, you know, that which is above "tama". So, that which is a higher,
you know, state of knowledge. So, those, you know, auspicious planets, those
pure planets, with, where the, you know, where the knows, the knowers of, you
know, the kno..., the knowers live. "uttama-vidām". The knows, knowers of the
higher knowledge live. They, that, that those "lokā"s will be attained. So,
earlier, Krishna has described that, "prakāśaḥ". He has used the word "prakāśaḥ"
to characterise the mode of goodness, you know, twice. First, in His initial
description in 16.6. And again, in another description, in 16.11. So, those who
live in knowledge in this life, they gain further knowledge after this life.
That is how it is. We live in knowledge. We will gain further knowledge by that.
So, "uttama-vidām lokān". "uttama-vidām lokān". "amalān pratipadyate". So, this
can refer to the svarga. It can, actually, it refers to even higher "lokā"s,
also. Above the svarga "lokā"s. This does not refer to liberation clearly.
Because Krishna will talk about liberation later on. After desc... describing
the analysis of the three modes. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. But if we live in goodness, then we attain the destination, you know, as a
destination, those places which are in goodness. Now, our, our svarga "lokā" is
in goodness? You know. Relatively speaking, we could say yes. As compared to the
earthly planetary system. Where often people live without any, you know,
reference to scripture. The, you know, the svarga "lok...", the, these people in
svarga "lokā" are definitely, you know, more in goodness. They definitely accept
the authority of Vishnu. They accept the authority of the Vedas. You know. But
even if they do not, not necessarily accept the, you know, accept the, you know,
you know, pro..., pro..., pure, process of, to pure devotional service. The
process of devotional service. And the goal of pure love. They will not acc...,
you know, you know, they may not be aspiring for that immediately. They are
devotees. They may not be pure devotees. But they are definitely devotionally
minded. And they are more, you know, theistic. They saw, saw, you know, the
acceptance of scripture authority. The acceptance of devotion to Vishnu. That
itself is indicative of their goodness. So, that devatas are definitely in
goodness as compared to the earthly planetary system. But other devatas are in
goodness as compared to transcendence? No. You know. Devatas are not so much in
goodness as compared to transcendence. You know. Sorry. Not even in then,
com..., as compared to the, you know, life, say, Brahmaloka. Or Patsata,
Satya "lokā". Janaloka. Tapa "lokā". The upper planetary systems. Where
people perform austerities. And where, you know, in, there are no, in, say, Tapa
"lokā". Janaloka. It is not that people are drinking Soma Rasa. And, you
know, you know, enjoying with apsaras. In, so, there the, you know, you know,
life is much more focused on austerity. Much more focused on liberation.  Much
more focused on transcendence. So, that will be much more goodness. So, we
should not think of goodness as just one homogeneus, you know, attitude.

You know. Even within goodness, also, there are levels. So, there are, there are
goodness which is much more towards passion. Then, there is goodness which is
much more closer to transcendence. And then, there is intermediate goodness,
also. So, if we consider goodness not as a homogeneity. But as a sp..., spectrum
within a, within an overall, you know, you know, you know, within an overall
shade of, you know, purity. As it is "amalān". "prakāśaḥ". It is lang..., of
knowledge and purity. You know. Within that, you know, with that, you know,
common setting, there is the spectrum over there. So, it is, so, "uttama-vidām".
So, if people live in goodness, then they attain these "uttama-vidām lokān". So,
even those in svarga are not necessarily always considered "uttama-vidām". You
know. You know. Because, you know, they are also caught in the pursuit of sense
gratification. You know. So, so, living in goodness can take one to svarga. It
can take one higher to than svarga, also. It depends on the level of goodness
that one has cultivated. You know. Now, after describing this, "amalān
pratipadyate". You know. Then, after that describes that what happens when one
lives in the modes of passion and ignorance. That is talked about in the next
verse. You know. You know. You know. You know.

        rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā
        karma-saṅgiṣu jāyate
        tathā pralīnas tamasi
        mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate

"rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā". "rajasi". When there is a mode of passion. "pralayaṁ
gatvā". If one dies in the mode of passion, you know, then, what happens?
"karma-saṅgiṣu jāyate". "karma-saṅgiṣu". That those who are attached to fruitive
work. That means those who are materialistic. If one dies in the mode of
passion. Then, one is reborn here. You know. In, you know, you know,
"karma-saṅgiṣu". In attachment to fruitive action. "tathā pralīnas tamasi". And
if one dies in the mode of ignorance, then "mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate".
"mūḍha-yoniṣu". So, "karma-saṅgiṣu" refers to the earthly planetary system
primarily. Here, people are attached to doing fruitive work. And "mūḍha-yoniṣu".
So, "mūḍha-yoniṣu", you know, you know, we see a parallel structure over here.
"jāyate", "jāyate" is there in, you know, B and D. And "yoniṣu", "saṅgiṣu" is,
you know, similar sounding. And "karma" and "mūḍha" are almost words that have
the same levels of sus..., same number of syllables. So, we see, there are many
places where the Gi..., Gita. Charac..., the Gita, characteristic of Bhagavad
Gita, the poetry characteristics do come out. You know. So, the "karma-saṅgiṣu
jāyate". And "mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate". So, "mūḍha-yoniṣu" refers to, "mūḍha" is, as
we know, it can refer to a foul. Or it can refer to a, you know, donkey. So, a
donkey, you know, "mūḍha-yoniṣu". You know. So, those who live in animal like
species. Those who are, those who are, animal, animal, the, basically, the word
species. Those who are foul, the foulish species. That is the animals. That
means if one lives in ignorance, then one attains the lower species. So, here,
what Krishna is essentially telling is that, you know, you know, you know, you
know, if we live in passion, then we come back. You know. Take birth here again.
So, sometimes, you know, people ask this question that, you know, today, you
know, it is said that, you know, if the number of souls is fixed, then why is
the population increa..., how do we understand the increase of population? You
know. So, actually, that is not very difficult to understand. Because, you know,
firstly, the increase in population is a very relative conception. You know. We
really do not have clear population, or estimates of, or fo..., thousands of
years ago. You know. Several thousands, years ago. You know. The, the whole idea
of discovery of, you know, new lands. Which was a medieval concept. When they
say, America was discovered. Or Euro..., or India was discovered. You know. So,
this whole concept of discovery 10:45
