Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FaDE3c3-R0 Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=6FaDE3c3-R0&redir_token=RDKN4uKMzYGNsBHOLxZdHmIurDt8MTU0ODQ4OTYwN0AxNTQ4NDAzMjA3&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_122_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.27-13.35_-_How_the_jnana_chakshu_helps_us_to_see_and_attain_brahman_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya totra vetraika panaye jnana mudraya krishnaya gitamrita
duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the last part of the 13th Chapter. 13th Chapter is entitled, the "Nature,
the Enjoyer and Consciousness". So, we discussed how the chapter overview is.
Let us have a quick look at that. Based on that, we will understand, you know,
what is happening in the chapter. So, Arjuna has asked questions about six
things. "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam". "puruṣaṁ". "prakṛtiṁ". And "jñānaṁ". And
"jñeyaṁ". So, Krishna has answered about all these six until now. You know. The
last section discussed about "puruṣaṁ". And "prakṛtiṁ". And now, Krishna will
give us an integrated world view. A "Jnana-chakshu". In which, He will explain
how all of this fits together. So, that is the verses from 27 to 35. So, let us
look at these verses. So, this is not really, directly related with any specific
question that Arjuna has asked to Krishna. But this is a bonus which Krishna is
giving as a further integrated view of what, you know, of the concepts that
Krishna has taught, you know, talked until now. Especially in this chapter. You
know. You know. You know. So, 13.27.

        yāvat sañjāyate kiñcit sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamam
kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt tad viddhi bharatarṣabha

You know. You know. "tad viddhi" is commonly used by Krishna. Know this. So,
what i..., what is this that "bharatarṣabha"? The best of the Bhāratas should
know. "yāvat sañjāyate". Whatever exists. "sañjāyate". So, comes into being. Or
exists. Comes into existence. "sañjāyate kiñcit". Even the smallest of it.
"sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamam". That that maybe "sattvaṁ". That, in the existence
which may be moving or non-moving. "kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt". It all comes by
the contact of the "kṣetra". And the "kṣetrajña". The contact of the, you know,
knower of the field. And the field itself. So, what is Krishna doing in this
chapter? You know. In this particular verse. Essentially, He is telling that,
or, you know, the, you know, variety of this world can be reduced down to
fundamentals. And that capacity to reduce the diversity to fun..., you know, to
fundamentals, you know, that helps us to develop a more enlightened view. So,
ultimately, you know, whatever we see in this world, if I see a beautiful
painting, it is a combination of "kṣetra" and "kṣetrajña". That there is colors.
There is paints. There is canvas. And all, that, all that is a part of the
"kṣetra". And then, there is a painter. That is, that is the "kṣetrajña". And
the combination of "kṣetra" and "kṣetrajña" has produced, you know, the, you
know, paintings. So, like that, if there is a big building. Building is also a
combination of "kṣetra" and "kṣetrajña". So, this is a "k...", philosophical
vision. In general, "Jnana-chakshu" is that which enables us to see things more
deeply. More seriously. More, you know, lovingly. You know. How lovingly?
Ultimately, when we see Krishna, then we see things lovingly. But before that,
we see them more dispassionately. We, with respect to material things, we want
to become detached. And with respect to spiritual things, we want to become
attached. But when we look at this world, we do not want to be infatuated with
this world. You know. And that is why we talk about detachment in terms of, you
know, seeing with "Jnana-chakshu". So, when we see, oh, the, so many things are
captivating. But ultimately, it is nothing, but "kṣetra". And "kṣetrajña". That
combination. Then, we do not get so worked up by these things. You know. You
know. So, we un..., now, beyond the sco..., the "kṣetra". and "kṣetrajña", there
is, of course, ultimately the supreme "kṣetrajña". And that will come a little
later. The supreme "kṣetrajña" is the "īśvaraḥ". Who is the controller of
everything. So, Krishna in, now, first, He describes in 27th, ok, see all of
creation as just made up of, all of existence are made up of ma..., made up of
"kṣetra" and "kṣetrajña". Now, what should, once we understand this, what is the
result of that? That brings equa..., equal vision. You know. So, that is talked
about in this verse. And in the next verse, the result of that equal vision is
talked about. So, let us look at this verse now.

        samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ
yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati

You know. So, "samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu". "samaṁ" is equally. "sarveṣu bhūteṣu".
One who sees all living beings equally. "tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram". One sees the
"parameśvaram", you know, the, you know, the "īśvaram" who is "parama". So, the
acharyas have explained what is being referred to here in different ways. So,
here, Prabhupada explains that this can refer to, "parameśvaram" can refer to
the Supreme Lord. And it can also refer to the Jiva. Now, "parameśvaram" is
referring to the Jiv..., you know, Supreme Lord, is easily understandable. He is
the supreme "īśvaram". Often, the word "parameśvaram" is used that way. How can
it refer to the Jiva? The "īśvaram" who is, you know, "parama". The word
"parama" does not necessarily have to mean supreme. The word "parama" can also
mean transcendental. You know. You know. So, you know, just like "para" and
"apara" "prakṛtiṁ", "para" does not necessarily mean, have to mean supreme. It
simply means transcendental. So, "parameśvaram". "parameśvaram" means that
"īśvaram" who is transcendental. Who is not actually material. Although, may be
currently in material consciousness. So, "samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu". When we see
all living beings. And then, what do we see them? "tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram".
One sees that the s..., transcendental Lord is situated in the, in the hearts of
all living beings. And one sees, they themselves are actually transcendental.
And what is the specific relevance of this? With respect to the context of
Arjuna? And Krishna being on the battlefield? "vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ."
"vinaśyatsv". "vinaśyatsv" is, it is destructible. What is destructible? The
body is destructible. Arjuna was concerned that what will happen to my, you
know, you know, you know, elders? Especially "Droṇa" and Bhishma? How can I
possibly kill them? He is saying actually you should be able to see that they
are not the bodies. They are the souls. "vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ". You know.
That although the body, they are in perishable bodies, they themselves are
imperishable. And "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". One who sees like this is the true
seer. Krishna has used this, you know, phrase "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". This
line. You know. You know. Several times. In the Bhagavad Gita. As well as it
comes in the Mahabharata. In the Bhagavad Gita, this has come in the Fifth
Chapter. You know. You know. You know.

        yat sāṅkhyaiḥ prāpyate sthānaṁ tad yogair api gamyate ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca
yogaṁ ca yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati
        
In 5.5, describes how, one, you know, you know, should see, one see the true,
you know, the commonality in the paths of yoga and sankhya, as both being meant
for the same ultimate purpose of attaining the, of knowing in, attaining the
Absolute Truth. So, the, one who sees like this. One who sees beyond superficial
differences to the common goals. You know. Then, then, such a person is actually
the seer. "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". So, similarly, here, that means when Krishna
says "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati", the idea is what? That this is how we should try
to see. You know. We all want to be enlightened. We all want to have proper
understanding. And proper knowledge. We have that knowledge. Then, rsi..., this
is how we should see. "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". You know. So, "samaṁ sarveṣu
bhūteṣu". So, actually, one of the great results o..., of acquiring knowledge is
the capacity to go beyond, you know, superficial biases, prejudices. And, you
know, you know, emotional, emotionally induced misconceptions. You know. You
know. So, if we start seeing that all people are, you know, I am an Indian. So,
you know, people make blanket statements. You know. I am an Indian. That person
is Pakistani. All Pakistani is a terrorists.  Or some people say that, oh, these
people are muslims. Muslims are terrorists.  Or, terrorism, so, there are so
many people which equate certain people with certain characteristics. You know.
For example, some people may say that, Sardars, they are all foolish people.
Now, and people make jokes like that.  Now, if this is all of characteristic of
bodily misconception. You know. Every soul. Whichever be the community.
Whichever be the race. Whichever be the gender in which the person has born.
Ultimately, that person is a soul. And, you know, the, of course, there are
differences at the bodily level. And we do not deny those differences. There may
be certain cultural and sociological differences, you know, you know, which come
because of the body. And accordingly, we will have to deal accordingly, we go,
you know, appropriate ways. But we also have to see the commonality. So, this
sort of superficial differences, which can divide nations. Sometimes, you know,
if s..., there are dynastic flood, feuds, you know, long ago, in some, you know,
there are two opposing family. Then, one family, maybe somebody has killed that
other family person. Somebody person, somebody has probably. And then, the sons,
they become enemies. And then, the grandsons become enemies. And the
great-grandsons become enemies. And it is, continue to be fighting generation
after generation. Hurting each other very, where the original feud is so utterly
irrelevant. So, all this is based on bodily conceptions. And, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, let the dead past buried instead. So, now,
we can, we all talk like this.  And we will laugh. Ah. Yeah. Yeah. These are
simple bodily conceptions. But then, we have, within our devotee circle, also,
our own discriminations. You know. We say, oh, this is my guru's disciple. That
is this, that, another guru's disciple. Now, we may say is the guru designation
material? Or is it spi..., spiritual? You know. Our relationship with our
spiritual master is spiritual.  But we have to check how much is our
consciousness spiritual. You know. Am I, you know, am I talking about my guru,
you know, is, is so that I can gain more pride? Because my guru is great? So,
therefore, I am great. So, actually, the idea is I want to be great. So, I use
my guru's greatness to try to prove my greatness. So, we can have a God family
around, you know, our spiritual master.

But the most important point is to recognise that this sort of, you know,
division should be for creating greater cohesion. It should not be for creating
descension. What does it mean? That means that you know when there are brahmana.
Ksatriyas. Vaisya. Shudras. Depending on how one views it, there, one can say
there is so much discrimination. And then, suddenly, so much descension. So much
power struggles. The lower casts have, rebel against the upper casts. The upper
casts exploit the lower casts. And, you know, there is so many wars which have
happened. But the original purpose of the varnashram was to have, you know, to
ha..., provide, you know, the, you know, so, you know, social arrangement which
would provide like an extended family. So, from the functional point of view,
within the varanas, there are "vrajati". So, with..., within brahmanas, also,
there are different kinds of brahmanas. Different levels of brahmanas. And these
brahmanas would be like an extended family. So, belonging to a particular
community, you know, brings a, if it brings a sense of a bigger family. By
which, there is greater cohesion. And there is greater connection.  And caring.
Then, that is positive. But if that leads to descension. Oh. Am my community. If
my community's defining identity should be, you know, as devotees, if I am a
devotee, my defining identity should be my connection with Krishna.  You know.
If my defining identity is in contradistinction to others, you know, what is,
what does it mean, say, I am a hindu? And what is the defining identity of a
hindu? Hindu is one who opposes the muslims. That is a very foolish
understanding of Hinduism. Or who is a muslim? A muslim is one who, who, you
know, kills the Kafirs. You know. That is very superficial understanding. So,
you know, you know, you know, our identi..., fa..., we, we may create certain
identities within a spiritual community, also. For example, some people say
that, you know, oh, you know, my spiritual master is an Indian guru. And your
spiritual master is an, not an Indian guru. This is a foolish idea. The guru is
transcendental. The guru is not, you know, guru, you know, and the guru is
teaching us, guru, now, we may have our doubts or our faith about how
transcendental my spiritual master is. But the point is the transcendence of the
spiritual master is based on the transcendental connection with the
transcendental parampara. And the transcendent message, you know, that is being
delivered. So, these sort of ideas are "dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair". We discussed
in the "Upadesamrta" how this is very superficial material vision. And this can
be offensive. You know. "gaṅgāmbhasāṁ". You know. "gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu
budbuda-phena-paṅkair". That just as there are, you know, you know, bubbles. And
there is dirt in "gaṅgā". But one still con..., "gaṅ...", knows that the "gaṅgā"
is sacred. Similarly, one understands that it is, say, you know, that the pure
devotee, that once devotees, the transcendence is not affected by any material,
superficial, you know, difficulties. Or problems. So, now, you know, you know,
you know, similarly, there might be an opp..., opposite inference that is down.
Inferen..., if you want to just go, some people say that Prabhupada in the first
eleven people whom he appointed, there were no Indians. So, Prabhupada did not
want any Indian gurus. You know. We could just, you know, make any kinds of
inferences we want. This sort of, you know, Prabhupada never, you know, did this
sort of quota system within ISKCON. You know. This is, so, we should not, you
know, reci..., we were not, know it, sometimes, we may do consciously.
Sometimes, we may do it subconciously. Ultimately, what is Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
telling us? He is telling us "yei":

        kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei
‘guru’ haya

Who is a guru? "kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya". That actually, it does
not matter whether he is a "sanny...", "nik...", "sannyāsī" or a "śūdra". You
know. "kne...", you know, whether that person is a brahmana. Or whatever. If
that person is knowing about Krishna, that person can be a spiritual master. So,
you know, they just as, we have, we talked about spiritual masters now.
Similarly, we have to talk about devotees, also. We cannot have, you know, body
based distinctions. Now, definitely, the body plays a role. And it i..., affects
our people's behavior in certain ways. It affects people's attitude in certain
ways. And that is something which is natural. And we cannot de..., de..., we do
not have to deny that. Or reject that. But that does not mean that we have to,
you know, pigeonhole people. We, and equate them with wh..., our designations.
The whole process of spirituality is meant to help us come out of pigeonholes.
Not to, you know, go deeper into the pigeonholes. And certainly, in a spiritual
society, we should not designate people with equating, by equating them with
their pigeonholes. You know. Going further, when we look at the, you know, you
know, you know, you know, equal vision. The equal vision is primarily based on
the understanding of spiritual con..., con..., spiritual knowledge. You know. A
deep understanding of spiritual knowledge. So, you know, here, of course, in
this section, Krishna is talking from the jnana perspective. So, one sees that
beyond matter is spirit. So, the first verse said see that everything is, all of
existence is matter and spirit. Then, see beyond matter and spirit. Then, you
will have equal vision. The next verse describes what is the benefit of having
this equal vision. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. So,
Prabhupada acknowledges that both these can be interpreted in different ways.
You know. You know.

"The Sanskrit word parameśvara is sometimes translated as “the individual soul”"

And then, he is sometimes:

"there are others who interpret this parameśvara to be the Supersoul."

So, Prabhupada explains why is this, you know, you know, the soul.

"because the soul is the master of the body"

And the body acts, at least partially, according to the will of the soul. And
then, the soul also goes to another body. That body destroys. The soul is not
destroyed. In that sense, it is the master. You know. You know. Now, in the next
verse, Krishna describe what is the effect of this.

        samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra samavasthitam īśvaram na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ
tato yāti parāṁ gatim

So, "samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra". In this way, one who sees everywhere equally,
"samavasthitam īśvaram". One who sees that the "īśvaram" is situated equally.
Then, "na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ". "na hinasty". Therefore, there is no
degradation. There is no, you know, pushpin down. "hina". Lower. good. Going
downwards. "ātmanātmānaṁ". The mind does not degrade the self. And then, not
only does, the mind does not degrade the self. "tato yāti parāṁ gatim". When one
is not degraded in this, this way, one attains the supreme destination. "tato
yāti parāṁ gatim". What is this talking about? Generally, it is our material
vision that causes problems. It is our material vision, you know, that makes us,
say, you know, hold grudges against others. That makes us create vendetta. That
actua..., it is actually material vision which leads to lust. Anger. Greed.
Envy. Pride. And illusion. And these cause, you know, the "hinasty
ātmanātmānaṁ". These cause the degradation of the soul. So, "ātmanātmānaṁ". So,
the soul is degraded by the mind. So, when there is no equal vision, then for
example, you know, we see different people. Oh, this person is wealthy. He has
so much money. I want to get that money. And this person is poor. You know. You
know. Useless person. So, you know, and I neglect him. I disrespect that person.
Like that, you know, in material vision. And a man looks at a woman. You know.
There is dharmic rel..., you know, relationship between man and wife. But then,
a man looks at a woman. Oh, this is attractive. And then, that per..., you know,
per..., person takes a bat. Attacks that woman. Or whatever. So, then, or, the,
develops affair. Or whatever. Then, there is, you know, lust. And that lust is
acted upon. It is sukarmic entanglement. So, it all starts from the inability to
see beyond matter to spirit. So, "na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ". "na hinasty". One
does not degrade oneself. How? Because one understands that actually some "samaṁ
sarveṣu bhūteṣu". Sorry. "samaṁ". So, previous verse was "samaṁ sarveṣu
bhūteṣu". Now, it is, here, the focus is on vision. And its affect on our, you
know, destination. You know. You know. So, you know, "samaṁ". When one sees
every..., "samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra". And what does "samavasthitam īśvaram"?
Now, this is significant. "samavasthitam īśvaram". The "īśvaram" is equally
situated in all living beings. That means that the "īśvaram" is situated in my
heart. Situat..., situated in that person's heart. Situated in everyone's heart.
So, when, you know, the, you know, son of Samik Rishi, the son, the brahmana
boy. Shringi cursed "Parikṣit Mahārāja". So, at that time, "Parikṣit Mahārāja",
how did he see it? "samavasthitam īśvaram". He says that actually, it is this,
by the Supreme Lord's will that I have been cursed. Now, we may wonder, how is,
where is the Supreme Lord's will? There is this small child. Boy is
uncontrolled.  And he is giving into his anger. So, you know, it is his anartha.
And his anartha is overcoming him. So, how is that related to the Lord acting?
So, we have to understand that, you know, the actions can have, how, work in
different ways. So, you know, you know, yes, Shringi might have been acting
because of his own anger. But the Lord is so expert that the Lord can use
somebody else's anger to elevate us. To instruct us. So, you know, how yoga maya
and maha maya work is quite complex.

So, in the "Bhāgavatam", it is described, then, when then, "Dhṛtarāṣṭ...", when
Dury..., Duryodhana, so, verbally castigated Vidura. Saying that, oh, you are a,
you are a, you know, you are a daughter of a shu.., you are a son of a shudra.
And you are a traitor. And you have fo..., you are poisoning the, biting the
very hand that has eaten you. He spoke un..., unrepeatable, you know, you know,
you know, insults to, you know, Vidura. So, it is described in the "Bhāgavatam",
Vidura saw this as the action of the yoga maya to help him get disentangled from
the nefarious affairs of the Kurus. Now, we may wonder, where is yoga maya over
here? You know. Duryodhana acting. And Duryodhana is filled with greed, is
filled with envy. And he is acting out of that greed and angry, you know, to
hurt the Pandavas. And to hurt everyone who are related with the Pandavas. So,
he is acting out of his own greed. That is true. But we have to understand that,
you know, you know, Duryodhana may be acting in yoga maya. In maha maya. But,
you know, that does not mean that Vidura has to respond in maha maya. If Vidura
sees the situation with spiritual vision, then Vidura can respond to it in yoga
maya. And then, he can see the situation, also, as an arrangement of the Supreme
Lord. So, you know, you know, he can see that, ultimately, as Duryodhana is
giving into his anartha and speaking accordingly.  But through it, I have the
opportunity to go closer to Krishna. So, he saw the opportunity that let me just
depart. So that I will not have to the, he knew that sooner or later a war is
going to happen between the Kauravas and Pandavas.  And he certainly did not not
want to fight, you know, for the Kauravas. As he would have to because of his
brotherly relationship with "Dhṛtarāṣṭra".  Stepbrotherly. But still, brotherly
relationship. And so, and he actually did not want the fight. And he knew that
it was Kaur..., Duryodhana who was to be blamed for, you know, you know,
triggering trouble. And tormenting. And persecuting. And humiliating the
Pandavas. So, he tried his best to give counsel to Duryodhana. But when
Duryodhana did not listen, instead, Duryodhana turned on him, only. And started
insulting him, him. Then, Vidura left. So, that means with a proper spiritual
vision, you know, whatever happens, we will be able to see it as an opportunity.
For our progressive spiritual advancement. You know.  This devotional
reinterpration..., reinterpretation of events is vital for our spiritual
advancement. You know. You know. One of the greatest examples of such devotional
reinterpretation is, you know, you know, Jesus' crucifixion.  Resurrection. You
know. Jesus, you know, was, he, he prage..., but he practically did not, as far
as we know, in terms of the biblical records. You know. He did not, you know,
you know, go, he did not travel, act too extensively. He, he tra..., travelled
maybe 100-200 hundred mile. That is all.  He did not go on extensive pilgrimages
anywhere. And, you know, you know, you know, then, he, according to, in the
unknown years, it is said that some people may say that he has come to India.
And there is some reasonable evidence for that. But, you know, the point is that
he stayed in a limited area. And during his time, his followers were not many.
And then, one of his own followers, that twelwe, among the twelwe apostles,
Judas betrayed him. And he was persecuted.  And he was executed. He was
crucified. That was a painful death for him. And it was a devastating defeat for
his followers. Because at that time, the idea was that, a messiah who would
come. The messenger who would come and deliver us.  That messenger would come
and, you know, would come on a, you know, on a horse with weapons. And would
just devastate and destroy the enemies. And thereby, asked from his followers
expecting that Jesus would show some miracle. And save himself. And Jesus was
killed. And then, it seemed that everything had ended at that time. But then, it
was a devotional reinterpretation. What was that? You know. The, later on, of
course, there are many events. There is the you care, you know, there are, you
know, you know, several events that happened. There was some sportings of Jesus.
And whatever. But the important point is, after that, they understood that
actually Jesus ascended to heaven. And it has not been a defeat. It is a
victory. And that is how we have been red..., redeemed for our sins. So, the end
result of it was that they felt more devoted to Jesus. And they felt more
inspired to wor..., share the message of his, you know, la..., you know, message
of his sacrifice. And the message that he had given with the whole, you know,
world. And that is how what could have ended as a small whimper. As an
insignificant s..., thing which would not even have been a footnote in most
history books. When turned to became the, become the world's greate..., one of
the world's, you know, you know, longest religions. Existing religions. And
re..., according to buddhid..., decent pap..., according to history, and the,
what has done most numerous religion in the world. So, that is all
reinterpration. So, now, we may wonder, is this a matter of just interpretation,
reads, reinter...? F..., what is the reality? You know. What is it actually that
anybody can interpret reality in whichever way one wants? No.  The point is:

        anukulasya sankalpa pratikulasya varjanam

You know. Events are going to happen in this world. And we will not always
understand why they happen, you know, you know, you know, the way they do. But
we, as devotees, hav..., always have the opportunity to, to see them in a way
which is anikula to our bhakti. And see what I can do, you know, in this
situation that can take me closer to Krishna. So, that is the devotion that a
devotee should try to cultivate. "anukulasya sankalpa pratikulasya varjanam".
So, this equal vision. You know. Of course, that way, we are talking about, you
know, different context. You know. Jesus. But I am talking about the principle.
"na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ". That often, we let small things become very big.
Because we see them negatively. But when we see, ultimately, the "īśvaram" is in
control of everything. So, no matter what happens. You know. Sometimes, in the
devotee community, terrible things happens. You know. Some, in some places, you
know, the devotees, the temples, when the communities, where they are staying,
they are demolished. You know. You know. The, sometimes, the devotees are
accused. To, as being a cult. And then, there is, there are charges made against
them. Sometimes, devotees are arrested. And, you know, and formal Soviet Union,
devotees were even tortured. You know. You know. So, all this is happening. And,
you know, sometimes, it happens. So, how do we see this? We understand that
ultimately the Supreme Lord is in control. "samavasthitam īśvaram". Everywhere,
He is equally situated. And He is equally in control. So, He may allow certain
things happ..., to happen. And that may be because of the, you know, greed. And
the arrogance. And the lust of certain people. But along with that, there is
also the opportunity for us to go, to deep, go deeper in our relationship with
Krishna in all situations. And it is to the extent, you know, we have this
positive perception of reality. Therefore, "tato yāti parāṁ gatim". We will be
able to be Krishna Conscious. We will be able to be conscious. Yes. ultimately,
this is also an opportunity for me to serve. And if I serve in this way, "parāṁ
gatim". I will attain the supreme destination. You know. As devotees, we should
always try for, how can I interpr.., you know, understand the situations, you
know, anikula for my bhakti. And to the extent we pray for this, to that extent,
we will get that vision. And the more we get that vision, the more we will make
spiritual advancement. Now, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada writes that
one:

"does not degrade himself by a destructive mentality, and he therefore gradually
advances to the spiritual world."

You know. You know. You know. So, in our spiritual path, we, you know,
Prabhupada uses an interesting word, "destructive mentality". "destructive
mentality" means that one does not, you know, act in a way that becomes
self-defeating. That destroys ourselves. And instead, one acts in a way by which
one becomes purified. Elevated. And liberated. You know. So, we are going on a
proper path which will ultimately reach through destination. All that we do not
have to do, all of us, especially, have got that path by Krishna's mercy. By
Srila Prabhupada's mercy. You know. All that we need to do is to move along that
path. If we just, you know, take a u-turn. And, or we just go off the road. And
fall off. Then, it is we who have to be taken, and blamed. And it is our mind
which makes us do those things. But if we stay steady, the mind will not be
able, allow..., be able to do those things. And we will be able to move on in
our spiritual life. Let us look at the next verse. You know. You know. You know.

        prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ yaḥ paśyati tathātmānam
akartāraṁ sa paśyati

So, "prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi". That, you know, "prakṛti". You know. It is the
activities of kar..., the karma that is performed by "prakṛti". "kriyamāṇāni
sarvaśaḥ". Everything that is happened, that is happening is "kriyamāṇāni" How
is it happening? It is happening because of "prakṛti". And then, "yaḥ paśyati
tathātmānam". One who sees in this way. "ātmānam akartāraṁ". That the "ātmā" is
not the doer. "sa paśyati". So, here, the phrase "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". That
was used two verses ago. In, you know, 28, is used again. You know. But here, it
is being split over two lines. So, in 28, it was "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati".
Straight. But here is:

        yaḥ paśyati tathātmānam akartāraṁ sa paśyati

It is split over C and D of the 30th verse. But essentially, the message is
same. That this is how we should see. So, how should we see? That actually, it
is material nature that is the doer of things. And the soul is the non-doer. So,
this is actually the exact opposite of the ve..., you know, 3.27. The more
famous verse. Which says that:

        prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni
        guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. "prakṛteḥ".

        prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni
        guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

Actually, everything is done by "prakṛti". And, you know, you know:

        ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā
        kartāham iti manyate

Because of "ahaṅkāra", the deluded soul, the "vimūḍhātmā" says that actually I,
thinks that I am the doer. So, that is the "vimūḍhātmā". The deluded soul. But
here, Krishna is talking about the person who is enlightened. One who is able to
see things properly. So, that per..., so, the deluded soul sees that actually I
have, I have, does not see that things are done by the mode and thinks I am the
doer. Whereas, here, the person sees that, oh, actually, it is the Lord who is
the doer. It is not, sorry, it is not, I am not the doer. It is material nature
that is doer. So, why material nature? Why not the Lord? Actually, until now,
one has not yet con..., got a clear conception of how the Lord has, interacts
with material nature. Krishna is talking about a jnani whose conception is
evolving. And the jnani is, you know, their vision moves from matter towards the
spirit. And they see that matter is primarily acting by its own patterns. And,
you know, of course, Krishna has stopped from the perspective of bhakti.
"mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". That ultimately, all the movements of "prakṛti" are,
happen under His supervision. That is definitely true. 9.10. But here, in 13.30,
the emphasis of Krishna's message is that the jnanis do not necessarily become,
their focus is not so much on becoming God conscious. And certainly not
conscious of God as a controller of the world. Their focus is basically to go
beyond this world entirely. And think about transcendental spirit. So,
therefore, you know, for them, yes. Actually, they see this material nature is
just, just working on its own patterns. Therefore, there is no need for me to
become attached to auto...., you know, captivated. And ultimately deluded by it.
So, that means a person may sing very beautifully. A person may be able to talk,
to talk very beaut..., you know, very, you know, eloquently. A person may be
able to manage very efficiently. A person may have extraordinary looks. And a
grace. And, you know, poison. Elegance while, say, walking along. So, there are
so many different ways in which different people can attract. Now, we understand
that these features are coming ultimately because of "prakṛti". That those
people have done certain karma. And based on that karma, they learnt to be here
in certain ways. Now, of course, we are not saying that these entirely comes by
karma. Certainly, people can cultivate certain things. We, the point here is not
to deny the effort that is made by the particular person. So, if somebody is,
you know, very good speaker. And can speak eloquently. That, you know, that,
that is also because that person has practiced speaking in this life. And he is
habituated to long hours of endeavors so that the speech is proper. So that, you
know, you know, if endeavor, there is endeavor, the credit should definitely be
given. But the point is, ultimately, we recognise, you know, that no matter how
sweetly a person sings, you know, we cannot, no human being can sing as sweetly
as a nightingale can sing. You know. No matter how good, I, athlete a human
being becomes. Or, you know, winning the setting, you know, an all-time record.
Say, in a hundred meter sprint. But how many of us can become as fast as
steadily, lifelong as does a leopard. Or a chita. You know. You know.  You know.
Or a, for that matter, a deer. Or whatever. So, we may develop certain features.
But the point we are talking about is generic features over here. You know. Why
is that an eagle's eyes or a hog's eyes have piercing vision? And our eyes do
not have some, so much piercing vision. All this is because:

        prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi
        kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ

You know. You know. That all these attributes are coming because of the actions
of "prakṛti". So, you know, you know, when we see other people, you know,
behaving, this continuation from the previous verse's theme that, you know, that
one, if one can see others with s..., pure, equa..., spiritual vision, then one
will not become devastated. When the world seems to fall apart. So, you know,
you know, one will be able to see that beyond the world, also, there is a
reality. Which will not shak..., which we could, perceiving which. And
connecting with which will prevent one from become so totally shaken and
shattered by the upheavals of the world. So, here, the point is, yes, things may
change. So, specifically, some person might act in an inimical way towards me.
And I will definitely try to defend myself. So, if somebody is lusty. And
somebody approaches a, you know, you know, forces oneself on a, on, on someone.
So, now, what is happening? Is that person responsible? Definitely. That person
is responsible. And that person needs to be punished. Definitely. There is no
doubt about it. That is what a king would do. And that is what Lord "Rāma" did
to Lord "Rāvaṇa". But at the same time, one also recognises beyond this. That
this is lust. And material nature is inducing lust. And this person has become
a puppet to the lust. And, when we, when we say it is a puppet. That does not
mean that is, one is not responsible. No. One, with, this is not the kind of
puppetry for which we are, about which we are helpless. So, we induce. People
themselves choose to become lust. People themselves choose to become greedy.
People themselves choose to become angry. But the point is that, forgiveness is
important for ourselves. Because if we do not forgive, that resentment burns us.
And one way we can forgive is by recognising that beyond the actions of people
are principles. And the principles are that, that, that there is, you know, that
there is material nature acting in particular ways. If we play with fire, we
will, you know, we will get burnt. So, if somebody, you know, somebody fuels
lust, that person will be overpowered by lust. And that person will act in
be..., bestial ways. That is how things are. 37:33
