Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PsxpTYjw3Io
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the, you know, 17th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We discussed in our
previous class about, you know, you know, in the section, you know, section 17.4
about, you know, how different people in different modes worship different, you
know, you know, Gods. And different conceptions. So, we discussed about
"pañcopāsanā". We discussed about ghosts, also, within that. Now, let us look to
the next section. You know. Here is a quick overview. You know. You know. Of the
various sections. So, now, we will look at demoniac austerity first. And then,
we will go back, go unto, you know, you know, un..., un..., understanding the
three modes based on that external characteristics. You know. You know. So, now,
when Krishna talks about the three modes. The focus is on, you know,
understanding, you know, you know, you know, you know, how these can help us to
understand the level of faith of a person. You know. You know. You know. So,
here, let us look at this verse.

        aśāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ
        tapyante ye tapo janāḥ
        dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ
        kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ

        karṣayantaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ
        bhūta-grāmam acetasaḥ
        māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ
        tān viddhy āsura-niścayān

So, "aśāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ". "aśāstra-vihitaṁ". That means that which is not
talked about in the scriptures. "ghoraṁ". "ghoraṁ" is that which is dreadful.
Harmful to others, Prabhupada translates. "tapyante ye tapo janāḥ". You know.
Those people who do austerity of this kind. "dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ". And, you
know, what is the nature of their austerity? The, it is filled with arrogance
and, you know, you know, you know, pride. "dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ". And they
are motivated by "kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ". By desire and attachment. "karṣayantaḥ
śarīra-sthaṁ". "karṣayantaḥ". They torture themselves. "bhūta-grāmam acetasaḥ".
"bhūta-grāmam". The body that is made up of material elements. "acetasaḥ". You
know. You know. "acetasaḥ" means, their con..., you know, the consciousness is
not, is misdirected. Is not directed towards spiritual reality. It is
misdirected. And then, whom do they trouble? "karṣayantaḥ". "māṁ caivāntaḥ
śarīra-sthaṁ". So, they torment, not only themselves. But they torment me, also.
Krishna says. "māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ". You know. They torment me, too. And
"tān viddhy āsura-niścayān". They are definitely "āsura"s. They are definitely
"āsura"s. "tān viddhy āsura-niścayān". You know. You know. You know. So, when
they talk in this way. "tān viddhy āsura-niścayān". What is the important point?
That that definitely "āsura"s. Now, why is Krishna talking about demons? In this
chapter. Which is not about, you know, the demoniac nature. Krishna has already
talked about demoniac nature in the previous chapter. So, He is giving a context
for the discussion. So, Arjuna's question was, those who have faith, but not in
scripture. What happens to them? Krishna describes that they can be the, we have
to understand it, the..., their faith level. Based on the three modes. They are
in one of the three modes. Now, Krishna is starting this discussion by going to
the bottom of the frame. Bottom of the scale of reference. So, within the scale
of reference, what is, at the bottom is? The people who are completely
misdirected in their thought process. In their lifestyle. In their even
conceptions of religion. Rather than understanding religion as an approach to
God, they think of, you know, religion as an approach to their own ego. And, you
know, yeah, of course, everyone has an ego in this world. And most people are
not trying even to purify their ego. But these people are extreme even in their
obsession with the ego. That they are, for the sake of ego, ready to even, you
know, even torment themselves. Torture themselves. "māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ".
You know. So, now, what does self-torture here refer to? You know. Sometimes,
some people think that, any form of self-control itself is self-torture. You
know. For example, you know, if somebody is, you know, abstaining from food. You
know. For, for the sake of fasting. So, some people think that itself is
self-torture. You know. It can, it may be self-torture if there is no purpose to
it. If there is no positive purpose to it. Definitely, if it is meant for, you
know, say, spiritual realisation. Then, that is not self-torture. That is the
way to self-transcendence. You know. We go beyond ourselves by this. We do not
get into self-torture. We go beyond to self-transcendence. You know. You know.
You know. And then, further than that, the important point is that we need to
move forward in our spiritual life.

And any, moving along any path ma..., requires making choices. So, for example,
if I am at a particular place. And two roads are going to different directions.
Then, when I choose one road, then naturally, I am giving up the other road. So,
making a choice involves making a sacrifice. And that is what is required all
the time. And in fact, not making a choice also involves al..., sacrifice.
Although, I do not, may, I may not think of it that way. That mean..., how is
that? That means when I think about, you know, you know, how I will do a
particular thing, or I, I decide not to do a particular thing. You know. Then,
what is happening? I am staying "akimva". I am staying undecided. And indecision
is also a decision. Then, usually, it is not the best decision. That means if
somebody is undecided whether I should practice spiritual life or not. And
because of being undecided, that person does not practice spiritual life. Then,
that itself involves a sacrifice. That is, sacrifices, you know, that person
is losing the opportunity to practice spiritual life. So, indecision is also a
decision. And it is rarely the best decision. So, you know, you know, you know,
every choice involves making a sacrifice. And when we, you know, make a choice
based on scriptural understanding for a higher spiritual purpose, that is
choice. And that sacrifice. Or auspicious for us. But when a person,
"aśāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ". When a person does not follow "śāstra". And acts in
ways that are harmful to others. Then, such sacrifice is definitely not
glorious. Such sacrifice is unfortunate. Such sacrifice backfires on the person.
Why it backfires? Because such fires, sacrifice does not lead to that person's
steady progressive spiritual advancement. You know. So, you know, such sacrifice
leads to the, you know, you know, entanglement of the person in further bodily
consciousness. And not only in bodily consciousness. But further in, you know,
self-centeredness. Which is even self-defeating. And self-destructive. So, for
example, some people do self-flagellation. Self-flagellation means beating
oneself. Beating oneself with whips. Now, that is extreme for most nowadays.
Some people wonder, want to shave. They pluck out their hair from the body. So,
now, if they are doing it for a spiritual purpose, then, they, even that is
actually a mi..., mi..., mis..., misconception about how to make spiritual
advancement. And some people are not doing it for a spiritual purpose at all.
You know. So, then, that can even be demoniac. So, now, what do we mean exactly
by demoniac? See, generally, we do not think of austerity as demoniac. We would
think of austerity as, you know, you know, you know, positive. You know. I, we
say, estori..., austerity requires some mode of self-control. It requires
self-discipline. And a person who can do austerity is considered to be, you
know, positive. You know. Glorious. So, you know, you know, the, now, Krishna is
saying, s..., "tān viddhy āsura-niścayān". These are definitely demoniac. Those
who torture themselves. And those who do not do anything positive for their own
spiritual advancement. But rather, they are motivated simply by pride and ego.
And they care nothing for "śāstra". They care only for their own ego. So, this
is the mentality that is in the Seventh, in the 16th Chapter. Krishna has
described this demoniac.

Now, in the Ramayana, there is a, you know, incident which is often, you know,
framed in casteist terms. And talked about as caste discrimination. But
actually, if we look at the whole context, the essential message is quite
different. You know. So, after Lord Rāma won the war. And he came back to the,
you know, king..., "Ayo...", kingdom of "Ayodhyā". And took over as the king. At
that, one day, and they were ruling, you know, happily. At that time, suddenly,
you know, a brahman came to the, you know, outside the palace. And started
screa..., you know, you know, calling out for help. And, you know, you know,
speaking, you know, you know, speaking in great grief. So, "Lakṣmaṇa" went out,
you know, you know, and, you know, the brahman said, it, pointed the bod...,
body that was with him. His body of his son. And he said the son has died. And
he says, if I look at my life, I have done my brahmanical duties properly. So,
there is no reason for the son to have died. So, the only reason the son has
died, that I can think of, is because in this kingdom, something inauspicious is
happening. That is why the normal course of nature has been reversed. The normal
course of nature is that the father dies before the son. But the son has died
before the father. So, you know, you know, "Lakṣmaṇa" went. And reported to Lord
Rāma. And Lord, at that time, itself, Nārada Muni and many other great sages had
come to the palace of Lord Rāmacandra. And they were seated on, you know, you
know, exalted seats. So, Lord Rāma folded his hands. You know. And asked them.
You know. What do you think? You know. Can you please tell me what is the cause
of this? So, Nārada Muni went into deep meditation. And contemplated. And then,
he has said, you know, there is some serious adharma activity happening in some
part of your kingdom. And because of that, as a reaction to their adharmic
activity, this inauspicious thing has happened. So, Lord Rāma became very grave.
He told "Lakṣmaṇa". And, you know, co..., court assistance to preserve the body
of that prince. Of that brahman son. In oil. So that the body would not
decompose. And then, he went around searching in his kingdom. You know. He went
in all directions. But he could not find anything. Finally, he came to the bank
of a river. And there, he saw an effulgent-loo..., you know, he saw a
dark-complexioned person looking quite, you know, radi..., you know, quite, you
know, having a blaze around him. And he was upside-down hanging on a tree. With
his legs. So, his legs were covered in a bran..., you know, covered around a
branch. And he was hanging upside-down. And he asked, you know, Lord Rāma asked
him. You know. Who are you? And what are you doing? So, he said that I am a
shudra named "Sambūka". And I am doing austerities so that I, you know, can
attain Svarga. Now, when Lord Rāma heard this. That I am a shudra. And I am
doing authori..., austerity to attain Svarga. Did, Lord Rāma took out his sword.
And tuck. Chopped off his head. So, you know, the moment he chopped off his
head, that very moment, the, you know, son of that brahmana came back to life.
And the brahman was relue..., relieved. And the, you know, disorder that was
there was restored. So, now, we may wonder, if some brahmana is performing
austerity, is that a capit..., is that a crime worth capital punishment? Isn't
it, you know, isn't it so cruel? And what was this crime? He was doing
austerities. Just because a shudra, does it mean that the desire deserves to be
killed? You know. If we are going to apply moral standards, today's moral
standards on the Ramayana, then we have to look at the complete context.

You know. You know. Either we accept the full story as true. Or we accept the
full story as false. You know. So, if it is just false, then neglect the story.
Why bother about the hottest thought in that story? If we consider it true, you
know, true not necessarily, even if, if we do not consider it to be as a
historical incident that happened. But if we consider it to be, you know, true
in the sense that it is meant to teach us some values. Then, we have to look at
the tree, story in its whole context. So, the context is that, you know, first
of all, from our moral values, from our sense of moral values, imagine that,
you know, you know, you know, some, say, scientist, sons, you know, son, some
scientist son died today. You know. Will that scientist go to the prime
minister's office? A prime minister's home? And say, you know, you know, because
you are not managing the country properly, so my son has died. You know. First
of all, we would, we would, the scientist would never do such a thing. And even
if he did it, the prime minister would not even take notice of such a thing. So,
secondly, you know, if somebody, if somebody gets killed. And then, the dead son
of the scientist comes back to life. We would not even believe that. So, the
fact that the Ramayana connects the death of someone with mismanagement in the
system. You know. In the government. And then, connects the death of the shudra,
of Shambuka with the revival of the, you know, you know, brahman son indicates
that there are forces involved over here. Which are unfamiliar to us. Which are
even unc..., incomprehensible to us. So, what are these forces? These forces
actually are, there are subtle laws of go..., you know, dharma. And karma that
apply. And which we do not know about. So, actually speaking, you know, the,
within the Vedic context, fo..., every, you know, every varna has to do one's,
its own activity. As Krishna is, also says:

        śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ
        para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt

It is better to do one's own dharma. And to be destroyed. To die while doing
one's own dharma. Than to do somebody else's dharma. You know. Perfectly, also.

        sva-dharme nidhanaṁ śreyaḥ
        para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ

So, Krishna talks about this. And the idea is, you know, the idea here is what
basically? This world is like a hospital. And different people are infected by
different diseases. And everybody needs to take a treatment by which they will
be cured. So, what is that treatment? That treatment varies from person to
person. But that treatment has to be taken. By whoever the person may be. You
know. You know. Different treatment for different people. Whatever is my
treatment, I have to take that. You know. So, the program of different duties
for different varanas is meant as a treatment. You know. For different. So, it
is, at a spiritual level, it is a tip, treatment in, that gradually elevates
everyone. And at a material level, it is a system of engagement for everyone
according to their propensities. So that they are able to satisfy themselves.
And are also able to contribute to society. So, both ways, it is auspicious. You
know. You know. But if someone neglects this, you know, reality. And focuses
instead only on the fact, you know, you know, that, the fact that, you know, you
know, this person was doing an austerity. And he was killed for that. Then, we
are completely misrepresenting. You know. If in a hospital, a patient suddenly,
you know, get-crashes into some other, you know, you know, a patient, from some
other, you know, one ward goes into, you know, some other ward. And starts, you
know, taking medicines of that ward. Or starts disrupting the functions of that
ward. And say, that by, ward has, you know, things which are, you know, high
security. High sensitivity. High volatility. Then, you know, then, that can be a
culpable offense. So, here, you know, you know, if the, you know, if Lord Rāma
had been just simply casteist. You know. And, you know, then, you know, we see,
there are other pastimes which refute this notion. How do we understand that
Lord Rāma had such a loving dealings with Guha. You know. When Lord Rāma went
out with the forest. At that time, went out to the forest after the exile. Then,
he went to the place of Guha. And there, Guha was a, actually, a tribal. Who used
to, who used to fish. You know. And, you know, you know, you know, he was
considered to be an outcast. But Lord Rāma embraced him. Lord Rāma stayed at his
place. And, you know, you know, Lord Rāma acce..., you know, had very loving
reciprocations with him. So, not only that, Lord Rāma went to "Śabarī". And
Shabari was also an outcast from the Vedic, from the varnashram perspective.
And Lord Rāma accepted not just her food. But he accepted the food which had
been, you know, you know, half-eaten by her. And then, Lord Rāma even befriended
"Vibhīṣaṇa". Although, Vibhishana was born in a "rākṣasa" family. So, ev..., the
point is that if we look at the ex..., broad context of the Ramayana. Then,
Lord Rāma is accepting anyone and everyone who has a devotional disposition. And
somebody who has a power-hungry disposition, Lord Rāma punishes them. So, you
know, the acharyas describe that, you know, "Shambuka", you know, he wanted to
perform austerity so that he could displace Indra. And then, he could take over
Shachi. And enjoy her. So, that was a demoniac mentality. And Lord Rāma
recognises demoniac mentality. And for a shudra to perform austerities, you
know, with a "kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ". "dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ". As it is
described in this verse, that is definitely severely disruptive of the Vedic
order. And that is why that should never be done. And that is why Lord Rāma had
to take the strong action against it.

You know. You know. So, therefore, we cannot judge actions by their externals.
You know. Austerity may seem to be very, you know, you know, you know, noble. Or
pow..., you know, acti..., you know, an activity involving self-control. And
self-discipline. But it does not necessarily have to be like that. You know. You
know. You know. So, then, let us go on now to the next section. You know. You
know. Now, we start with the discussion on, you know, you know, you know, you
know, you know, on the different kinds of yajna. Dhana. Tapa. So, let us look at
these. You know. You know. You know. So, here, when, now, why is Krishna
discussing about this? Krishna is, as I said, is giving the bottom reference for
everyone else. The bottom reference means that these are, when we want to talk
about the faithful. And the faithless. What He has to look for is, those who
are, you know, He starts by talking about those who are right, right at the
bottom. And then, he will elaborate on this point by telling further how people
who are, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, just a minute. You
know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know. You
know. So, just a minute, kindly excuse me. Yes. So:

        āhāras tv api sarvasya
        tri-vidho bhavati priyaḥ
        yajñas tapas tathā dānaṁ
        teṣāṁ bhedam imaṁ śṛṇu

So, "āhāras tv api sarvasya". That, actually, the food that different kinds of
people eat. "tri-vidho bhavati priyaḥ". That the, the food that different people
consider dear. That can be divided into three categories. Similarly, "yajñas
tapas tathā dānaṁ". Similarly, "yajñas, "tapaḥ". And "dānaṁ". That can also be
divided into three categories. "teṣāṁ bhedam". So, the "bhedam" among them,
"imaṁ śṛṇu". Arjuna, please hear about the "bhedam". Please hear about the three
categories of, you know, you know, food. And then, three categories of "yajñaḥ".
"dānaṁ". "tapaḥ". You know. You know. You know. So, now, Krishna will start
with, you know, you know, firstly with, you know, food. So, let us look at what
He says about food. So, Prabhupada gives a common purport for all the three
verses. So, we will discuss one by one. And then, we will go to the purport,
although.

        āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-
        sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ
        rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛdyā
        āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ

So, you know, you know, now, why is Krishna talking about these four specific
characteristics? These four fe..., you know, that means that, He is talking
about "āhārāḥ". And then, He is talking "yajñaḥ". "dānaṁ". "tapaḥ". Now,
"yajñaḥ", "dānaṁ", "tapaḥ" are considered to be very central activities in a
Vedic culture. Very important activities. And we will see in the 18th Chapter,
also, you know, that "yajñ...", Krishna says, Krishna quotes thinkers who say
that:

        yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
        na tyājyam iti cāpare

That "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma" should not be given up. And
"yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma". "pāvanāni manīṣiṇām". That these purify even the
"manīṣiṇām"s. "manīṣiṇām"s is the great souls. So, essentially, the point that
Krishna makes is, "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ" are, are glorious activities. You know. You
know. You know. You know. So, when He talks about "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ". What
essentially is He talking about? You know. He is talking about the ways in which
the faith within the heart is expect..., expressed. You know. You know. So,
generally, if we look at "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ", you know, know, we are not gaining
anything tangibly when we do these activities. You know. When we are giving
"dāna", we are giving charity. So, what are we gaining at that time? Actually,
we are not gaining anything at that time. And a tangible image it sense.
Similarly, if we look at "tapaḥ". We are doing austerity. What are we gaining
at that time? Not much. So, "yajña". Again, we are sacrificing something. We are
giving something which we could enjoy. So, "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ", actually, the,
you know, the, they, we do not gain anything by those activities. At a tangible,
visible level. And that is why those involve a certain kind of faith. You know.
You know. All activities involve some kind o..., kind of faith. But these are
the activities that are associated with religion. And these involve, would,
doing acti..., doing sacrifice at three different levels. You know. You know.
You know. You know. The soul is caught in three circles. As we have discussed
earlier, also. The soul is called in the Adhyatmik. That is the body-mind circle.
Then, the soul is caught in the Adhibhutik. That is the social circle. And the
soul is caught in the Adhidaivik. You know. That is in the cosmic. So,
psychophysical. Social. And environmental. You know. Circles. The soul is. And
where, wherever we are placed, we have obligations to, you know, those
situations in which we are placed. You know. Whoever gives us anything. We
become obligated to that person. And we are expected to return something to that
person. You know. So, how do we do that? We do that by, you know, doing
something for them. So, as far as our body is concerned, you know, we are using
this body for dharma. So, then we are expected to do something for the body. So,
we sacrifice by doing tapa. So, austerity is fa..., so, the Adhibhutik circle.
Sorry. Adhyatmik circle. Then, "dāna" is for other living beings. Soul is in
these three concentric more and more expanding circles. So, for the first
circle, there is, you know, "tapaḥ". For the second circle, there is, you know,
"dāna". So, we take so many things from different people. At different times.
And we are expected to give something in return. So, that is charity. And then
beyond that, the last circle is, you know, "yajña-dāna-tapaḥ". "yajña". So,
"yajña" is where we are sacrificing to the Gods. So, what we take from the Gods.
We have to, you know, you know, we are taking, how, what are we taking? You
know. We may thinking that the Gods, I do not even believe that they exist.
What, how are they giving me anything? But the point is they are giving a lot to
us. How are they giving? You know. They are giving through, you know, you know,
through con..., you know, the medium of universal utilities. We cannot provide
for our own, you know, air. Or water. Or heat. Or, you know, light. You know.
These are arranged by the, you know, arrangement of nature. So, these are the
activities through which we are returning. What we take from the universe at
different levels. So, now, you know, our und..., different people's
understanding will be different. And they will act in different ways. You know.
So, depending on their situation within the modes at different levels, they will
do different kinds of activities.

And "āhārāḥ". Even our food indicates the kind of faith we have. That we will
see here, you know, later on. So, basically, these four activities, they
demonstrate our faith. Now, "āh...", cu..., what about the food in the, made of
mode of goodness? That Krishna says. "āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-". So, what does
the, you know, food in goodness do? "sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ". "vivardhanāḥ" is
to increase. You know. You know. So, what does the food in mode of goodness do?
It increases. You know. Increases "āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-". It increases the
"āyuḥ". It increases the "sattva". It increases the "bala". It increases the
"ārogya". You know. You know. So, if the food that we take improves, im...,
increase our "āyuḥ". Now, we may wonder that, actually, some people say that our
"āyuḥ" is fixed, You know. You know. That we are destined to live a particular
amount of time. The number of breaths that we take are fixed according to our,
you know, you know, according to our past karma. So, if that is so, then how can
we say that, you know, you know, you know, actually, a person, you know, "āyuḥ"
can be "vivardhanāḥ"? "āyuḥ" can be increased. So, actually, this, I, happens at
various levels. In fact, we have the full scien..., you know, Vedic science
called, you know, Ayurveda. Now, if, if the attitude had been fatalistic, oh,
everything is destined. And what are the use of Ayurveda? The Ayurveda, whole
principle of Ayurveda is that, you know, you know, you know, that that,
actually, tha..., that which counters. That which ensures our "āyuḥ". That which
prolongs the "āyuḥ". That which maintains the "āyuḥ". That which, it helps
people to, you know, live a life of quality. And quantity. So, the idea is, you
know, you know, how Ayurveda interacts with karma is complex. But the basic
principle is that we all have our duty to take care of the body, also. We
discussed this earlier in the pastime of Bali Maharaja. As well as the pastime
of Vasudeva. Devaki. "Kaṃsa". That the body is the tool for dharma. And
therefore, maintaining the body is also a duty. So, you know, you know, the
diff..., one way to understand it is that the number of breaths, that we
take, are fixed. And when we live in the mode of passion, then naturally, we
breath faster. You know. And when we breath faster, our lifespan expands faster.
You know. It, it get..., it gets expen..., you know, gets expended. You know.
Not expands. Expended faster. And that is how, the, in terms of time, in terms
of ages, you know, in terms of age, we may live lesser. So, that is why the
yogis, it is said that they breath, they try to regulate their breath. And learn
to breathe slowly. So that they can live longer. So, the important point here is
that, we can see, even from our own perspective that people who, you know, you
know, people who have healthy dietary habits, you know, they live healthy. You
know. They, they, those who have good healthy, good dietary habits, they live
healthier. And most of us can observe that if we eat some improper food, that
has its health consequences. So, "āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-". So, there is an old
egyptian saying which says that, you know, one fourth of you, one fourth of what
you eat, you know, maintains you. And the remaining three fourth maintains your
doctor. So, the indication is that, generally, people tend to overeat. And
overeat a lot. So, of course, Prabhupada would often quote Ayurveda saying that,
you know, we should eat up to 50 percent of our stomach. Remaining 25 percent,
we keep for water. And 25 percent for air. So, that the "prāṇāyāma". The, you
know, jella can help in the digestion of what we are eating.
"āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-". So, "āyuḥ" is, you know, the "āyuḥ" is imp..., you
know, the "āyuḥ" is the qualities, liberation of, life is improved, Then
"sattva". "sattva" is existence. So, Prabhupada translated, the food that
increase the duration of life, purify one's existence.

Now, we have discussed earlier about how, what goes inside us, affects us
inside. You know. So, you know, you know, that inside is not just physical. It
is also emotional. And spiritual. And now, you know, you know, you know, how
does it happen? Because, you know, you know, you know, when, whenever, whatever
way we interact with matter, that interaction with matter has its affects.
Whenever we interact with matter, our interaction with matter sha..., affects
and shapes our perceptions. Now, we can see it in a gross way, sometimes. You
know. If somebody, you know, looks at an obscene picture, then that immediately,
that is also an interaction with matter, only. That is a matter which is shaped
and colored in a particular way. But when our senses, eyes interact with that,
that affects our consciousness. That is some, you know, that, that creates
certain kind of mentality within us. So, you know, you know, now, with respect
to food, probably, we may think that the affect is only that when I see certain
kind of food, I feel a desire to eat it. Yes, that is one affect of the food.
Sometimes, I feel certain, attraction towards certain food. And certain food, if
I have eaten too much. Or if I had bad experiences. If I do not like the taste
of it. Then, I may feel reversion. Now, we may think that, "raga" and "dvesa"
are the only two reactions that we have to food. At, you know, when, you know,
the interaction of matter. You know. In the form of food, how it affects our
con..., you know, consciousness. But there is more, much more to it. Actually,
food shapes our consciousness. Even at the subtle level. You know. You know. You
know. Modern science generally talks about things in gross terms. "Ayurveda"
says that the food also has subtle component. You know. Which also shapes our
consciousness. That is why we become what we eat. You know. So, food that is
cooked with love. And served with love. That food enables us to become attracted
to Krishna. You know. So, you know, food that is, you know, cooked with love.
Love for Krishna. And served with, you know, a devotional disposition towards
Krishna. You know. That increases our attraction to Kri..., Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, say..., you know, talks about this in "Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You
know. You know.

        viṣayīra anna khāile duṣṭa haya mana

You know. You know. That "viṣayīra anna khāile". If we eat the food that is
cooked by karmis. Then, "duṣṭa haya mana". That the, the one becomes, you know,
mind becomes wicked. Wicked means that it starts thinking of self-centered
desires in an excessive or even exclusive way. And, you know, such a:

        duṣṭa haya mana

        nahe kṛṣṇera smaraṇa

Then, with such a mind, we cannot think about Krishna. So, the food that we eat
can purify us. If it is properly made. And, you know, Krishna talks about food
in the mode of goodness. That itself is purifying. In general, you know,
"nirmalatvāt". We discussed that one of the characteristics of the mode of
goodness is, you know, you know, it is purifying. That was what we have
discussed in the 14th Chapter. You know. You know. So, "nirmalatvāt".
"nirmalatvāt". Purifying. Now, beyond that purifying effect of the food is
further something higher. Which comes in the mode of goodness. Actually, the
mode of goodness itself is, what does, happening? You know. We are not getting
any further contaminations. But we are getting more and more situated in the
mode of goodness by taking that food. But higher than goodness is transcendence.
When we offer prasad to Krishna. And take that prasad. At that time, that prasad
is transcendental. And that enables us to also transcend the modes. Become free
from karma. And become more and more attracted to Krishna. You know.
"āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-". And the food gives us energy. When we eat, you know,
if we eat, overeat, then after eating, we feel like, you know, you know, feel so
loaded that we feel we cannot do anything. But otherwise, we can do a lot. Then,
"ārogya". "ārogya" is health. We get health by doing our activities. Our health
improves. And then, "sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ". So, these are at the level of,
you know, you know, you know, so:

        āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-
        sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ

"sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ" is, also, talks about, you know, emotional affects.
You know. "sukha" is, we, feels happy. "prīti". Yes. This is nice.
"vivardhanāḥ". "sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ". So, happiness and satisfaction. Yes.
This was good. I liked it. Thank you. "sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ". Generally, if
we take food in the mode of passion, then rather than feeling satisfied, we
actually feel agitated. More. More. More. More. We just feel like craving for
more. And more. And more. We never feel satisfied by the food in the mode of,
you know, you know, passion. "sukha". "rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛdyā". And what
kind of food is? "rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛdyā". "rasyāḥ" is juicy. "snigdhāḥ"
is fatty. You know. Enduring. "hṛdyā". "sthirā". And "hṛdyā". Is pleasing to the
heart. "sā...", "āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ". So, "āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ". So, such
is the food in the mode of goodness. So, you know, is some, you know, some, so,
let us look at what Srila Prabhupada says further. Prabhupada write cla...,
classically:

"The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the mind and
aid bodily strength."

So, that is, you know, "āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-". And then, you know, then,
Prabhupada gives the analysis of different kinds of food. And he talks about,
you know, when Kri..., he talks about "snigdhāḥ". Fatty. What does fatty mean?
It does not mean eat meat, Prabhupada says.

"Animal fat is available in the form of milk, which is the most wonderful of all
foods."

So, you know fatty food does not necessarily have to refer to animal fat. Animal
fat is tamasic food. And Prabhupada writes:

"Slaughter is the way of subhumans."

Now, some people may say that, actually, slaughter was happening in the past,
also. You know. Yes. It was happening. You know. But that was not the norm. And,
you know, yes, there were hunters at times. And there were butchers, also. But
the point was they were not, you know, or..., organised. And, you know,
brutali..., they would not brutalise animals lifelong as it happens today. So,
it is ghastly today if we go. If we go to slaughterhouses, then that, it is like
a, you know, it is an industry of insens..., of monstrous insensivity. You know.
Where millions of ma..., animals are forced to lead a life of insufferable
torture. You know. And then, they are killed. It is extremely brutal. You know.
Sometimes, then, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, when the hens
are, you know, you know, people might eat hens. But then will, or people might
eat chickens. So, the, but in the slaughterhouses, say, hundreds of hens are
kept in one small, you know, you know, constricted area. And because these hens
are so fru..., you know, so frustrated in this crowded. They do not have any
fresh air. They do not have any fre..., space to move around. So, in their
agony. And their misery. They often peck at each other. Peck each other. So, and
that damages the wears. That damages what dip..., you know, industry considers
the wear. You know. The flash is pecked. You know. Then, it does not cook so
nicely. It does not, so, taste so good. So, what is done is, before these hens
are put into the hen sheds, while they are alive. And while they are
conscious. They are caught. And their beaks are ripped apart. You know. Can you
imagine somebody coming and ripping apart our nose? You know. While we are
alive? And conscious? So, like that, the beaks are ripped apart. It is extr...,
it is brutal to an extreme degree. And they are not even given any painkillers.
And they should just live, live like that. And this is just one of the terrible
things. Like that, there are hundreds of, you know, ghastly things that are
done. You know. So, such sight, such a, you know, brutal slaughter is inhuman
entirely. And Prabhupada says this is subhuman. So, that is food in the mode of
ignorance. Now, let us look at food in the mode of, let us look one by one. So,
foo..., foo..., so, that is why this kind of food, this kind of food, which is
involved, you know, which is produced using brutality, that is definitely not in
the mode of goodness. Now, some people, there is a class of people who are
called as vegans. There are vegetarians. And there are vegans. So, the vegans,
you know, they do not, you know, take milk, also. And they say, even milk is a
product of violence. And, you know, foo..., you know, now, is it really true
that milk is a product of violence? Actually, it can be. You know. The Vedic
culture was such that cows were treated like mothers. And the cows were loved
for. Cared for. Valued. Served. And then, the ca..., cows when they were, cow,
loved. And cared. And valued. And the cows give milk in abundance. Abundance,
the cows give milk. But, you know, today, the cows are just treated as
manufacturing units. And, you know, you know, when the, instead of lovingly
taking milk from their udders, you know, machines are attached to their udders.
And the milk is squeezed out from their udders, you know, until the cows cry in
pain. And blood starts dripping out. And when the blood starts dripping out,
then the blood and the milk is separated. And the udder, then the
squeezing, it is stopped. So, you know, you know, this is brutal. And, you know,
similarly, when the, you know, you know, cows are there. The cows are also not
taken, you know, proper care of.

The cows are, you know, sick, are, you know, consu..., are again said, can in, kept
in congested locations. And this is not the way cow protection should be done.
40:03
