Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n4TpsVHR59I
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now going to go to the last section of the 17th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita.
The 17th Chapter discusses, you know, faith in the three modes. "Shraddha Traya
Vibhaga Yoga". So, in the 17th Chapter, Krishna has started by talking about how
faith within three modes. Arjuna's question was at the start of 17th Chapter,
those who have faith. And those who do not have faith. You know. That, that,
those two extremes are talked about in the 16th Chapter. The divine. And the
demoniac nature. But what about those who are in-between? Those who have faith.
But not in scripture. What happens to them? So, Krishna responds by telling
about the three modes of material nature. And how, by observing the modes, we
can understand what the, you know, situation of a person is. And accordingly,
that person's faith will be in that particular mode. So, we discussed about
"āhāraḥ". "yajñaḥ". "dānaṁ". And "tapaḥ". Now, Krishna comes to the solution
part in the last section. Wherein He says what, you know, if somebody's faith is
not scriptural. Somebody's faith is not transcendental. Then, how can that
person elevate faith? Elevate oneself? Increase one's faith? That is by doing,
by reciting "oṁ tat sad". So, that means, you know, you know, there can be
non-scriptural faith. There can be scriptural faith. And there can be
transcendental faith. So, non-scriptural means, somebody has some, some faith in
some, something which it comes in one's own tradition. Or culture. Or whatever.
Scriptural faith does not always have to be transcendental. In this chapter
itself, Krishna has said:

        yajante sāttvikā devān
        yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ
        pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye
        yajante tāmasā janāḥ

So, He describes faith in three modes. How people in goodness worship devatas.
People in passion worship the, you know, "yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ". "yakṣa"s. And
"rākṣasa"s. And "pretān"s. And "bhūta"s, they are worshipped by those in the
mode of ignorance. 02:09
