Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cNEJJ9lcrXE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_124_-_Bhagavad_Gita_14.08-14.13_-_How_the_modes_compete_and_how_we_can_choose_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=OX3PsMr7Y-wHEa-TlWVHmjegZVB8MTU0ODQ4OTY1NkAxNTQ4NDAzMjU2&event=video_description&v=cNEJJ9lcrXE

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the heart of the 14th Chapter. We, we discussed first the introduction of
how the soul becomes entangled within matter. And then, you know, we discussed
about the, you know, characteristics of the three modes. So, we discussed about
passio..., goodness and passion. Now, you know, you know:

        rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi
        tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam

We discussed that verse. And now, let us move forward to the characteristic of
the mode of ignorance. Before that, let us have a quick overview of the chapter.
So, you know, you know, we are in the section third, how the modes bind the
soul. You know. Let us start with verse 8:

        tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi
        mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām
        pramādālasya-nidrābhis
        tan nibadhnāti bhārata

You know. You know. You know. You know. So, "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". That
the mode of ignorance is born of ignorance. Now, this might seem a little
peculiar. But we will discuss this. "mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām". You know. That it
is, it deludes all living beings. "pramādālasya-nidrābhis". And how does it
delude? By producing "pramāda". Madness. "ālasya" is laziness. And "nidrā" is
sleep. "tan nibadhnāti bhārata". You know. You know. You know. So, "tamas tv
ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". What does it mean? You know. We may say, "ajñāna" is
ignorance. And generally, the word "tamas" is translated as ignorance. So,
tama-guna is mode of ignorance. So, what does it mean that the mode of ignorance
is born of ignorance? You know. The point is that this is a, you know,
perpetuate, it is a, you know, we, self-perpetuating vicious cycle. That first,
there is ignorance. And when we act, based on that ignorance, you know, you
know, you know, we aggravate the influence of the mode of ignorance. And in that
way, we complicate our life. You know. So, there is, you know, basic ignorance
with which we act. And then, we go into deeper ignorance. Just like when a
person is having trouble. And that person thinks that by, you know, you know,
taking alcohol, I can become free from that trouble. So, that itself is
"ajñāna". You know. I can just co..., forget all my troubles. You know.
Temporarily. But after that, they will come back. In a far more troubling form
than what they were at present. So, "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". "ajñāna-jaṁ
viddhi" means that, that idea that, you know, alcohol will product me from,
pro..., you know, will, you know, free, will solve my problems. Or will
free me from my problems is born of ignorance. And when one acts on that, then
what happen is, one goes into further ignorance. "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi".
And, you know, you know, you know, when one drinks, so, that is how there is
some basic ignorance. Because of which, one acts in then the mode of ignorance.
And that mode of ign..., action in the mode of ignorance further increases the
ignorance. And when one acts further in the mode of ignorance. So, one drinks,
one, one peg. Two pegs. Five pegs. And then, one does not have money, then one,
you know, you know, mortgages one's house. Or, you know, gambles. And loses a
lot of money. Then, one takes loans. And then, one robs. One may even end up
killing. There is no limit to how low, you know, you know, a blinding addiction,
just characteristic of the mode of ignorance can drag a person. How low that can
drag a person. So, "tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". Now, generally, we think about
some people. Yeah. This person is in the mode of goodness. This person in the
mode of passion. This person in the mode of ignorance. You know. So, we think of
it like that, generally speaking. But then, Krishna is telling over here,
"mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām". So, He has not used such a describer for everyone. For
the earlier modes, He has not used the describer, ok, that this is the mode that
binds all living beings. But He is using this mo..., point over here that
"mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām". It deludes all living beings. Why does it say deludes
all living beings? There are multiple levels of understanding of this. Firstly,
you know, you know, the very bodily conception itself is ignorance. And that,
all living beings are in the bodily conception of life. That itself, you know,
is one level of "tamas". Beyond that, there is also the, you know, you know,
understanding that everybody ha..., has to, you know, you know, take re..., you
know, sleep. And before sleep, we feel tired. So, that kind of slee..., you
know, "anidrā". "anidrā" is a basic bodily function. So, now, does it mean, now,
do, when people go into ignora..., people sleep, are they in the mode of
ignorance? Yes, they are. So, there may be, by pure devotees who may sleep,
also, for Krishna's pleasure. And they dream about Krishna. They are exceptions.
In general that "pramādālasya-nidrābhis". "nidrā" is something which everybody
has to go through. So, there is, you know, you know, you know, the mode of
ignorance which affects everyone. In that sense of, you know, everybody needing
sleep. But there is necessary, you know, contact with the mode of ignorance. And
there is unnecessary aggravation of the mode of ignorance. So, the aggravation
means that, you know, the mode of peop..., people, you know, we say small,
people drink or take drugs. And by that, they make the situation worse. So,
"pramādālasya-nidrābhis". So, "ālasya" is laziness. We have to do something. But
we refuse to do it. We put off doing it. "pramāda" means madness.

        pramādālasya-nidrābhis
        tan nibadhnāti bhārata

"tan nibadhnāti". That born, binds this, in, souls. So, here, Krishna is talking
about something which is very important. He is talking about "tamas tv
ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". So, the mode of ignorance is born of ignorance. It deludes
all living beings. And that is a common factor. But in some people, you know,
those who become lethargic. Those who become into..., intoxicated or infatuated.
Especially by destructive substances. You know. "tan nibadhnāti bhārata". So,
now, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada writes, you know, you know, that:

"the word tu is very significant. This means that the mode of ignorance is a
very peculiar qualification of the embodied soul. The mode of ignorance is just
the opposite of the mode of goodness."

So, goodness was characterised by "prakāśakam". And this is, cause characterised
by "ajñāna-jaṁ". You know. You know. You know. You know. "ajñāna-jaṁ". And
"prakāśakam". So, "ajñāna-jaṁ" is, it, darkness. Or ignorance. Or illu..., or,
or, or, you know, unawareness of what is the truth. And "prakāśakam" is the
illumination that one ena..., enables one to see the right thing. So, "tamas tv
ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi". Now, in these three verses, Krishna has given us a quick
summary of the three modes. A brief introduction to each of them with their
primary characteristics. So, now, you know, Krishna, the whole point of this
discussion is that the modes bind. So, you know, you know, the introduction is
also that:

        sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
        guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥ

"saṅgena badhnāti". "saṅgena badhnāti". "nibadhnāti" was there in all the
verses, also. So, now, Krishna gives a summary, you know, it was one-one verse
introduction. But now, after that, there is a one verse summary in this 14.9.
Where Krishna says exactly in one word how these three modes bind the person.
So, let us look at it now.

        sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati
        rajaḥ karmaṇi bhārata
        jñānam āvṛtya tu tamaḥ
        pramāde sañjayaty uta

You know. "sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati". 08:30 
