Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZZpwOirVTM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=spkScPtLRkgHRg9PV00G0SHmD-Z8MTU0ODQ4OTc3N0AxNTQ4NDAzMzc3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_129_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.11-15.14_-_Jnana-chakshu_to_appreciate_Krishna%27s_benevolence_at_the_material_level_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=FZZpwOirVTM

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the 15th Chapter. We, you know, discussed, you know, the first two sections
of the 15th Chapter. Let us have a quick overview. So, attain, first verse about
the upside-down banyan tree. Attain liberation by detachment. And if one is not
detached, then one, you know, goes on in the cycle of birth and death. So, this
section goes from 7 to 11. We have discussed until 10th verse. The 10th verse
talked about, you know, "jñāna-cakṣu". You know. You know. About seeing with
the eyes of knowledge. So, now, the question may come up, why do some people
have "jñāna-cakṣu"? And others do not have "jñāna-cakṣu"? What is the
difference? So, that is talked about in this particular verse. You know. 15.11.

        yatanto yoginaś cainaṁ
        paśyanty ātmany avasthitam
        yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno
        nainaṁ paśyanty acetasaḥ

So, it is "yatanto yoginaś cainaṁ". You know. You know. The yogis, those who
are, you know, striving for yoga. "yatanto". So, they endeavor. And "cainaṁ".
"enam" means this. H.., this is what? H..., this is reality of how the soul is
trapped in material existence. And is dragged around by the modes. So, you know,
"paśyanty". So, the yogi is who endeavor, they perceive. How do they perceive?
"ātmany avasthitam". By becoming situated on the spiritual platform. But on the
other hand, "yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno". You know. "yatanto ’py". Others may
endeavor. But still, they are "akṛtātmāno". They are, you know, they have, they
are not situated on the spiritual platform. "ātmānaḥ" is the soul. "akṛta" means
they have not actually, you know, adequately, you know, situated themselves on
the spiritual platform. They are not of the "ātmā" level. And therefore, "nainaṁ
paśyanty acetasaḥ". "nainaṁ paśyanty". One is not able to perceive. "acetasaḥ".
Because of misdirected consciousness, one cannot perceive. You know. So,
basically, there is a contrast here between those, you know, who is able to
perceive. One whose, you know, consciousness is, you know, one, who, both are
endeavoring. The word "yatanto" comes for both. But one is "ātmany avasthitam".
You know. The other is "akṛtātmāno". And "acetasaḥ". So, they are not able to
perceive. So, that means, you know, the, it is not just enough that we desire
and strive to perceive the spiritual reality. You know. That yes. The, so,
"jñāna-cakṣu". And, so, the previou..., the previous verse had the word
"jñāna-cakṣu". Now, here, the word is "paśyanti". So, yes, this logical, you
know, connection with eyes we see. So, you know, what is required for developing
this "jñāna-cakṣu"? It is not just endeavor. Endeavor is important. But if that
endeavor should lead to a transformation. By which, one can become "ātmany
avasthitam". One becomes situated in the spiritual platform. Srila Prabhupada
would give the example that, you know, you know, just, you know, endeavor or
willpower alone is not enough. If a person is blind. And there is a beautiful
painting. Maybe, the world's most beautiful painting. Say, a Mona Lisa. Or
some other painting something like that. You know. Even from the secondary point
of view, what is considered to be a very artistically magnificent. Now, if a
person just stands in front of a, you know, you know, you know, a painting. And,
you know, and, you know, you know, stares. And glares. And pears. It is not
going to much mag..., the difference. No matter how long that person stares and
glares. That person is not going to be able to see. A process is required. What
is the process? The process is a process of, you know, you know, healing. A
process of surgery. Or healing. Or whatever. By which, the person will develop
the eyes to see. So, just endeavor is not enough. There has to be guided
endeavor. So, the guided endeavor going, going on some treatment. By which, that
person can get the eyes. And see thereof. So, you know, you know, both are
"yatanto". But just by "yatanto", it is not that "paśyanty" will come. But along
with "yatanto", there has to be a transformation by which, you know, "ātmany
avasthitam". One becomes situated on the spiritual platform. Now, it may seem a
little bit, you know, you know, you know, you know, kind of a circular logic.
Which traps us. He says that, you know, to see the soul, we have to be situated
on the spiritual platform. And those who cannot see the soul, be..., you know,
be..., they, they cannot see the soul. Because they are not situated on the
spiritual platform. Now, we may wonder, what comes first? You know. If I cannot
see the soul, I will not feel inspired to become situated on the spiritual
platform. To try to advance to the spiritual level. And if I am not advancing
towards the spiritual level, I cannot see the soul. So, where does it begin? So,
we can rephrase this as, you know, two words. Perceive. And pursue. Perceive is
to see. And pursue, P, U, R, S, U, E, pursue is to go after. So, what comes
first?

Does per..., the perceiving come first? Or pursuing comes first? So, do we
perceive the spiritual platform first? And then, we will come to perceive it. Or
do we perceive it first? And then, we start purs..., pursuing it. You know. You
know. Actually, what comes first is hearing. Is submiss..., submissive hearing.
By hearing, we understand. There is a higher reality. So, you know, you know,
you know, you know, there is a higher reality. And then, that, you know,
triggers both. We get some perception of that reality. And that inspires us to
pursue it further. And then, when we pursue it more, we percei..., we perceive
it more. And then, that inspires us to pursue it further. So, we could say that
the initial, you know, initially, we have to do a little bit or pursuing. By
hearing. When we hear, by that, we start pursuing. You know. That itself is a
pursuing, basically. Seeking it. That is why "ādau śraddhā". With a little
faith. What is that faith? We have discussed. It is just, you know, you know,
inquisitiveness. But a serious inquisitiveness. Ok. What, what is this actually?
So, it is, it is, it may be, en..., be positive curiosity. It may not be a very
life-transforming inquisitiveness at that stage. It, if, that will, you know,
come, that stage will come later. But even if there is an initial
inquisitiveness. A positive favorable curiosity. That itself is a person. Ok.
Might people find out. What is this spiritual level? That will begin the
process. And:

        yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno
        nainaṁ paśyanty acetasaḥ

"nainaṁ paśyanty". One cannot perceive because "acetasaḥ". The consciousness is
caught at the material level. You know. So, Krishna has talked about this
"acetasaḥ". And similar concept. You know, a point of not being able to perceive
in:

        bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ
        tayāpahṛta-cetasām
        vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ
        samādhau na vidhīyate

So, "cetasām" is "apahṛta". The consciousness is abducted. Is, you know,
kid..., you know, "apahṛta" can also be kidnapped. You know. If there was a
child. When he is coming from, you know, when the child is coming from, say,
school to home. At that time, the child wants to go in a particular way. But
some kidnappers come and tuck. They take the child somewhere else. So,
"apahṛta". "apahṛta" is kidnapping. You know. So, you know, you know, you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, actually, we have to be
careful. You know. You know. If we do not want our consciousness to be, you
know, kidnapped. You know. "āpahṛta-cetasām". So, what causes the
"āpahṛta-cetasām"? That is, you know, the attachment to matter. So, if we do not
want our sou..., consciousness to be kidnapped, then we should not be kids. And
we should not take naps. What does that mean? Do not be kids. And do not kidnap.
So, do not be a kid. Do not take a nap. What does it mean? You know. We should
not be, you know, do not be a kid means do not be naive. Do not be childish. We
have to recognise that. You know. Spiritual life is a serious pursuit. And
children may be casual. Playful. Frivolous. You know. Sometimes, they like
something, so they will play. Sometimes, they do not like it. They will not
play. They will just give it up. So, they have hobbies. I think one thing as a
hobby. Tomorrow, another thing as a hobby. So, they are causal. You know. You
know. But we cannot be ki..., kids like that in our, you know, pursuit of
spiritual life. You know. We have to be serious. You know. Serious means we have
to recognise, we have grown up. When adults grow up, they recognise. Now,
normally, if we are working in a company. And sometimes, you know, we, if, say,
we have got a difficult, you know, work to do. So, if the curr.., job, if the
boss gives some work, we will basically, and we do not do the work. And then, the
boss asks, why didn't you do it? Because, we will be, say that I did not feel
like doing it. No. We will never, we will not say like that. You know. The boss
will say I do not feel like employing you. Now, get out. He shows the door then.
That does not, it does not work like that. So, we may fee..., have our feelings.
But we, our, sub..., we subordinate our feelings. So, kids are often ruled by
their feelings. But adults, at least to some extent are meant to rule their
feelings. So, you know, you know, you know, when we rule our feelings, then that
does not mean that, we are, switch off all the feelings. But then, we know when
the feeling, you know, we..., when to be guided by the feelings. And when to
subordinate, control the feelings. So, that is important. So, you know, do not
be a kid. And do not take naps. Do not take naps means we cannot, you know,
become lazy. A nap means just go off to sleep. So, we have to be constantly
alert. You know. You know. We recognise that if I have to raise to the spiritual
platform, it has to be a continuous steady pursuit. You know. If at any moment,
I lower my guards, tuck. What will happen? Maya is just waiting outside. And
maya will come. And catch me.

        nika tastha maya tare chapa tiya dare

"nika tastha maya" is right closed by. And just waiting. "chapa tiya dare".
Actually, the "chapa tiya" pounds. And capture. That is very, you know, rela...,
where can be rela..., related very easily with kidnapping. You know. Kidnappers,
what they do is, is he, as soon as they get an opportunity, they pounds from the
child. And drag way. So, like that, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, you know, for what we have to do is we have
to be alert. You know. So, we have to know that, you know, you know, Krishna
Consciousness is not just momentary or, you know, short, you know, short-lived
peaks of ecstasy. There has to be a steady climb in our consciousness. And the
peaks of ecstasy may sometimes come. You know. We feel very high. We feel
wonderful. Oh, I feel so happy in devotion service. I feel like dancing. And 
singing. And I feel like, you know, I feel joyful. I, you know, but then, other
times, I feel so dry. But either we feel high. Or we feel dry. We recognise that
I have to keep going on. Just this steady climb which we have to do. So, you
know, you know, those who do not do this. Those who do not do "akṛta-ātmānaḥ".
Those who do not do all this homework of situating oneself on the spiritual
platform. Situating oneself on the spiritual platform is not an abstract
concept. You know. It is not that, you know, just, if, sometimes, when we go in
a programme, there is a stage. So, you go and stand on the platform. So, is
spiritual platform like that? Some platform somewhere we go and stand on it?
You know. Situating ourselves on the spiritual platform means act..., basically,
acting at the level of the soul as much as possible. And not acting at the level
of the body. At the level of the body means what? My eyes see something
attractive. And I think, oh, this is so attractive. I want to go and, you know,
and enjoy it. My tongue, you know, eyes are, see something beautiful, you know,
see delicious, immediately, my tongue says I want to enjoy it. And we go after
it. So, acting at the bodily level means, letting the bodily desires and drives
rule our life. Acting at a spiritual level means, letting, you know, the, you
know, in, the needs and the opportunities of the soul, you know, guide our life.
Shape our life. You know. Mold our decisions. So, it is not an abstract
conception. It is not, to be situated, to be at the serious level of spiritual
platform, one does not necessarily have to be fully self-realised. You know. We
cannot be entirely at the spiritual platform right now. But we can act at the
spiritual level to a significant extent by choosing to not let the bodily drives
and desires, you know, rule our life. So, those who do not do this, those who
let the bodily desires and drives rule their life, what happens is "acetasaḥ".
For them, their consciousness gets, you know, dragged away from Krishna. Krishna
has used the word "acetasaḥ" also earlier, you know, you know, you know, in the
Bhagavad Gita. Even He is talking about the faithless people. You know. You
know. You know. You know. Here. Yeah. Ok. So, He talks about the faithful people
in 3.31. And 3.32, He talks about the faithless.

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto
        nānutiṣṭhanti me matam
        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

So, "acetasaḥ", He says. Those who are envious of Me. Those who are, you know,
those who do not have faith in my words. You know. You know. Even if they have
knowledge. "sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān". Their knowledge get destroyed. Because
"viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ". "acetasaḥ". Their consciousness gets dragged away.
Dragged away from Krishna. So, "acetasaḥ". You know. You know. You know. Now,
when, you know, here, Krishna is using the word "acetasaḥ". So, "cetasaḥ" is,
"cetasaḥ" is related with "cetana". Consciousness. So, "acetasaḥ" means, one is
not conscious. So, now, we are actually always conscious of something. You know.
If somebody is, you know, absent-minded. Now, when we say absent-minded, that
does not mean the, the person's, you know, does not have a mind. You know. You
know. That the person is absent the mind. The mind is not where we are. The,
where the body is physically present, the mind is not there. So, like that,
"acetasaḥ" means not that the person does not have consciousness. The person has
consciousness. And the person is conscious. But the person is not conscious of
what one should be conscious of. So, "acetasaḥ" means, what, if, one should, one
should be conscious of spiritual reality. But instead, you know, because of
excessive material. Excessive and unregulated material desires. And material
attachments. One is not conscious of Krishna. One is simply conscious of matter.
You know. You know. So, you know, how, how can this happen? You know. We may go
to the temple. And there is beautiful darshan over there. Beautiful deities are
there. But if we are agitated by lust, you know, we may, may not be taking
darshan of Krishna. We may be fantasising about other things. When we are meant
to take darshan of Krishna. So, Krishna is right in front of us. And 15:07
