Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DokmURlaJ6Y
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now coming to the last session on the Bhagavad Gita. The concluding part. From
verses 72 to 78. You know. So, here, you know, Krishna has spoken the charam
shloka. Charam is the pinnacle. The climax. The charam shloka is what, is the
word used by, you know, you know, you know, by "Rāmā...", you know,
"Rāmānujācārya" to refer to 18.66. So, that is the climax. Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura says that, you know, the Bhagavad Gita is like a jewel box.
And is like a treasury chest, rather. And he says, in the treasure chest, there
is a strong upper covering. And a strong lower covering. And within that, there
is a s..., treasure. So, like that, he says the upper Six Cha..., the upp...,
first Six Chapters. And the last Six Chapters. They are like the covering of the
treasury chest. So, first Six Chapters talk about how karma leads to bhakti. The
last Six Chapters talk about "jñā...",  how "jñāna" leads to bhakti. And
in-between, you know, are the, you know, middle Six Chapters. 7 to 12, which
talk about bhakti directly. And they are the treasure. So, this is how, his, you
know, you know, we, under..., his revelation of how the Bhagavad Gita is
structured. But then, he says that in order, you know, inspire people to open
the chest. And discover the treasure therein, as an incentive, two shining
jewels are kept on the cover of the chest. So, when people see, oh, there is
such a, such jewels are there on the outer covering of the chest. There must be
something wonderful. So, those two jewels, which are kept on the outer cover of
the chest, they are, you know, 18.65 and 66. "man-manā bhava mad-bhakto". And
"sarva-dharmān parityajya". These are, you know, shlokas, whi..., these are
verses which reveal the love of Krishna's heart. And they invite us. Call us. To
offer love back. So, in that sense, they are reflective in very powerful way of
the essential treasure of the Gita's message. So, like this, the Gita is
structured. And after describing in 18.65 and 66. "man-manā bhava".
"sarva-dharmān parityajya". Then, Krishna starts giving a "phalashruti". First,
He cautions about whom all we can give this knowledge. In 67. And 68-69, He
talks about the glory of sharing this wisdom with others. 70 talks about
studying it.  And 71 talks about hearing it. You know. You know. So, they, here,
Krishna completes. The "phalashruti", also. Now, the Bhagavad Gita is not just
an abstract, theoretical analysis. Krishna is hearing. You know. Krishna is
speaking this. Arjuna is hearing it. And like a, you know, serious
teacher-student discussing, Krishna is concerned. Has Arjuna understood it?
Understood the message or not? So, in 18.72, Krishna asks Arjuna. This question.
So, until now, in the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna has been questioning. And Krishna
has been answering. But now, Krishna questions. To check Arjuna's understanding.
Whether Arjuna has understood or not. Let us look at the verse. So, 18.72. You
know:

        kaccid etac chrutaṁ pārtha
        tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā
        kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ
        praṇaṣṭas te dhanañ-jaya

So, you know, Kri..., Arjuna is asked, being asked, "kaccid". Whether is it?
"etac chrutaṁ pārtha". Oh, "Pṛthā". Oh, Arjuna. Have you heard this? "etac
chrutaṁ". And "tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā". By you, with "aikāgreṇa cetasā". With
one-pointed attention. With one-pointed attention, have you heard this? And if
you have heard it, "kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ". Has the, you know, ignorance and
the illusion, "ajñāna-sammohaḥ", "praṇaṣṭas", dispelled? "te dhanañ-jaya". Oh,
"dhanañ-jaya". Oh, Arjuna. Has your ignorance been dispelled? Has your illusion
been dispelled? So, Krishna is inquiring from over here. From Arjuna. You know.
Two things. First is, have you hea..., heard attentively? And second is, have
you understood it clearly? So, you know, the first question is, you know, you
know, related in some ways to the battlefield contex..., battlefield setting.
You know. In a, when a turbulent and violent battle is about to take place, it
is possible that, you know, the student may not be very attentive. You know.
Imagine if we have to have a philos..., if we are having this Bhakti Shastri
class in a noisy marketplace. There will be so much disturbance. That naturally,
you know, often, when a class is there. And if, say, we are on a Yatra,
especially. And then, the sound system has to be arranged. And everything. That
time, we ask. You know. The speaker often asks. You know. Am I audible to you?
Are you able to hear me? So, that is to inquire whether the facilities for
hearing are adequate. So, similarly, you know, now, Krishna and Arjuna, there
is, in-between, that direction, the conversation, there is an inquiry. Now, of
course, they are close to each other. So, audability is not a problem. But the,
you know, ability to concentrate in such a situation can be a problem. So, it
is, of course, Krishna's expertise that by His presence. And by His
presentation, He transforms a battlefield into a classroom. And therein, He
reveals knowledge. The like of which has never been refu..., revea..., has
rev..., has, you know, practically never been revealed before. And never will be
revealed afterwards. Extraordinary knowledge, He reveals. So, He takes, you
know, you know, you know, a con..., student who is in a battlefield. Converts
that battlefield into a classroom. And raises the student's thoughts and
understanding to one of the climaxes in, you know, the wisdom all over the
world. So, it is, so still, Krishna, as a concerned teacher, is inquiring.
Arjuna, were you able to hear? Kri..., "tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā". "eka-agreṇa". You
know. "ekāgratā". So, actually, you know, in the stages of "samādhi", you know,
you know, "ekāgratā" is the penultimate stage. So, there are stage..., we have
discussed these different stages in, you know, you know, you know, over Sixth
Chapter, Dhyana yoga. So, you know, "ekāgratā" is a concentrated. Is the second
last stage. So, that, so, that, that also, that can refer to a yogic stage of
immense, you know, concentration. Or it can, in general, refer to attention.
Concentra..., concentrated, you know, hearing. So, con..., were you atten...,
could you here attentively, Arjuna? You know. And then, of course, we may say
that, attentively, I have heard. But that is, alone is not enough. Has Arjuna
been able to understand? "kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ". So, illu..., ignorance. And
illusion. Krishna is using two words over here.

So, ignorance means to not know. And illusion means to s..., understand wrong.
So, both are problems. You know. There is, the problem of, you know, not
knowing. If I do not know. For example, if I am sick. And if I do not know how
to take a treatment, I will stay sick. On the other, similar, you know, what,
similarly, or even worse. If I am sick. And I do not know what is the treatment.
And I take some other medicine. That may lead to some further complication. So,
actually, both are problems for us. To not know the right thing. And to think of
the wrong thing as the right. So, both of these have, both of these are,
misconceptions have to be removed. Because, so Krishna is asking Arjuna, "kaccid
ajñāna-sammohaḥ". "praṇaṣṭas te". "praṇaṣṭas". Destroyed. "dhanañ-jaya". Oh,
Arjuna, you are the conqueror of great wealth. So, have you, you know, conquered
this particular wealth? Have you been able to, you know, understa..., conquer
over ignorance? And, you know, illusion? And have you attained the wealth of
wisdom? So, the acharyas describe over here, you know, the implication of
Krishna's question is that Ar..., Krishna, as a compassionate teacher, is
asking. Have you understood? And if you have not understood, the implication is,
Krishna is ready to speak, whatever Arjuna has not understood, again. And if
Krishna, if Arjuna wants, Krishna is ready to speak the whole Bhagavad Gita,
also, again. So, whole Bhagavad Gita again. That is the extent of Krishna's
concern. So, generally, nowadays, if we have colleges in schools. Where there
are teachers. And the teachers explain something in school. And often, they
explain in such a way that the students cannot understand. And so, student goes
to teacher. And says, teacher, can you please explain? Teacher says, I will
explain. Come to my private couching classes. You know. Pay extra fees. Then, I
will explain to you. So, for them, teaching is often a business. But for
Krishna, it is not a, it is not a commercial enterprise. It is a compassionate
enterprise. You know. He is not concerned with, you know, you know, you know,
you know, our, anything that He will get. He is concerned with our well-being.
So, that is why He is sa..., saying, has, h..., oh, Arjuna, have you understood?
Has your ignorance and illusion been destroyed? If not, I am ready to speak the
whole thing again. And in this way, Krishna expresses His loving concern. So,
here, Arjuna replies. So, Arjuna has spoken. The last time, in, he spoke was in
18.1. When he asked the, the "tattvam" of "sannyāsa". And "tyāga". And then,
now, he is going to speak in 18.73. And these are the last verse that are
spoken in this conversation between Krishna and Arjuna. So, let us look at, you
know, that, you know, you know, question over here. In 18.73. So:

        arjuna uvāca

        naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā
        tvat-prasādān mayācyuta
        sthito ’smi gata-sandehaḥ
        kariṣye vacanaṁ tava

So, "naṣṭo mohaḥ". "naṣṭo". "naṣṭo" means destroyed. Arjuna was asked by
"praṇaṣṭas te". So, Krishna is, you know, Arjuna is confirming. "naṣṭo mohaḥ".
Yes, "naṣṭaḥ". "mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā". Actually, my "mohaḥ" has been destroyed.
And my "smṛtir", my memory has been restored. So, what memory? Memory that I am
the atma. Memory that I am primarily a devotee. And I am primarily meant to
serve Krishna. "naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā". And how has all this happened?
"tvat-prasādān mayācyuta". So, the word "prasād" is coming the third time in
this 18th Chapter. The mercy. Because ultimately, bhakti is a path of mercy. So,
"tvat-prasādān mayācyuta". The word "prasād" has come earlier in 18.58. You
know. Then:

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi

And then, again, it has come in, you know, 18.62. You know:

        tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata
        tat-prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ
        sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam

"prasādāt". So, "prasād". This mercy. So, the Bhagavad Gita gives a lot of
analysis. But in its conclusion, it is a path, it describe itself as a path of
grace. As a path of mercy. And as a path of mercy, it is revealing such
extraordinary levels of knowledge. So, by Krishna's grace, that which we cannot
understand very easily. We can understand. You know. You know. By His mercy. So,
what is difficult for us to do, it becomes easy by Krishna's mercy. And Krishna
is, Arjuna is saying, yes, it is by Your mercy, oh, Krishna, that I have
understood. It, "tvat-prasādān mayācyuta". "acyuta". Is significant that the
first and the last references, by Krishna to Arjuna, are with "acyuta". You
know, you know, the Bhagavad Gita begins in the First Chapter where? Krishna
tells Arjuna.

        senayor ubhayor madhye
        rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta

"rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta". Oh, Arju..., "acyuta". Oh, Ar..., oh, Lord, please
place me between the o..., two armies. And now, also, he is using same word
"acyuta". Why "acyuta"? "cyuta" means that which fall..., one who falls.
"acyuta" means one who never falls. So, Krishna never falls. Krishna never fails
His devotees. So, Krishna always remains transcendental. And Krishna unfailingly
helps His devotees. You know. So, in the beginning of the Bhagavad Gita,
Krishna, you know, was serving Arjuna. And as a serva..., as a charioteer in
that, you know, service role, He followed Krishna's, you know, you know, Ar...,
Arjuna's request. And took the chariot in-between. You know. Even when Krishna
is asking as a spiritual master, that is a borned of love. And in love, you
know, the devotee wants to serve the Lord. And the Lord wants to serve the
devotee. So, the Lord took on the role of a spiritual master. And Krishna is
telling that, oh, Kri..., Arjuna is saying that You are "acyuta", still. You
know. When You are acting, when You are the spiritual master, as a spiritual
master, also, You are perfect. You know. You do not fail. You do not fall. So,
you know, I asked You for enlightenment. And You have given me en..., you know,
enlightenment. By Your mercy. And then, "sthito ’smi". Now, I have become
properly situated. Earlier, Arjuna was shaken. You know. He was, physically,
also, trembling. And internally, also, he was shaking. But now, "sthito ’smi".
And then, "gata-sandehaḥ". "sandehaḥ" means doubt. You know. "gata" means to go
away. You know. You know. Arjuna's doubts have gone away. "gata-sandehaḥ". And
then, all my doubts have gone away. You know. How? By "sth...", "tvat-prasādān".
And now, after doubts have gone away, then what happens? "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava".
I will do Your will. "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". So, actually, the end of the
Bhagavad Gita is what? It is not simply, you know, you know, call, you know, it
is not simply a, ab..., just an abstract intellectual exercise. Or a, you know,
elocution performance. No. It is a call for transformation. It is a call for
redirection. It is a call for practical change. Just as a doctor, when the
doctor gives a prescription to the studen..., you know, to the, the patient, it
is a call for change. Change means, the patient, ok, you should do these, these
things. And you should avoid these, these, these things. So, then what does the
patient do? If a doctor ackn..., doctor tells, ok, this is your disease. Doctor
may shortage, show some x-rays. Explain some things. And at the end of that,
what will doctor say? Ok. Now, you have to take these, these medicines. And what
should the patient say at that time? Doct..., patient is going to say, oh,
doctor, very good doct..., you are very good speaker. And that is, that is not
the point over there. It is not a how good a speaker you are. The point is,
thank. I will do what you say. The patient has to cooperate with the doctor's
prescription. And do what the doctor is saying. So, similarly, Krish..., Arjuna
is telling "kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". So, when we hear from the spiritual master.
When we hear from Krishna. And Srila Prabhupada. And the, the devotees.
Actually, after hearing, we may say, as a matter of appreciation. That yes, it
was a good class. If we like the class. But the, you know, real appeciation, you
know, is shown not in appreciation. But in action. Real appreciation is shown in
implementation.

Yes, we do not just speak that, oh, it is a very good class. Real appreciation
is shown through implementation. I imp..., I do the action of implementing what
has been taught. And when we do that, you know, then there is true benefit. You
know. The, you know, that way, Krishna i..., is telling Arjuna. You know.
Krishna is giving a call for action to Arjuna. And Arjuna accepting that call.
"kariṣye vacanaṁ tava". We discussed earlier about how this section of the Gita,
yeah, you know, in this 18.73, reflects the pinnacle of surrender. In the Bible,
there is a famous statement. "Let thy will be done, not my will". So, you know,
you know, "Let thy will be done, not my will" in, so, refers to, you know, the,
at the, just before the 16:37
