Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K5tad_EiN7k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=R4MrCuNfZr5mCUilIOX_LBgS1Md8MTU0ODQ5MDA5NkAxNTQ4NDAzNjk2&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_141_-_Bhagavad_Gita_18.22_-_18.28_-_Action_and_doer_in_the_three_modes_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=K5tad_EiN7k&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the heart of the 18th Chapter. We are discussing, you know, "jñānaṁ".
"karma". And "kartā". Within the three modes. So, in verses 21 and 22 of the
18th Chapter, we have discussed, you know, you know, "karma", you know, "jñānaṁ"
in goodness. And "jñānaṁ" in passion. We discussed in 20 and 21. So, let us move
forward to 22. Where it is "jñānaṁ", knowledge in ignorance. You know. This
seems to be a paradox of, you know, you know, content, knowledge and ignorance
are considered opposite. So, let us see what is this knowledge in ignorance.

        yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin
        kārye saktam ahaitukam
        atattvārtha-vad alpaṁ ca
        tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

You know. You know. "yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin". If "ekasmin". You know. There
is only one, you know, thing that is a reality of. So, to consider one part of
reality to be the totality of reality, that is knowledge in the mode of
ignorance. So, "kṛtsna-vad" means everything. So, to think of "ekasmin".
"ekasmin" is one thing. To think of one thing to be everything, that is, you
know, you know, "tat tāmasam udāhṛtam". So, that is first thing. One thing is
everything. What are the characteristics? "kārye saktam ahaitukam". "kārye
saktam". That means to become attached to one activity as if it is the totality.
As if it is everything. "ahaitukam". You know. The word "ahaitukam", you know,
is normally used in a positive sense to refer to bha..., you know, to
"ahaitukam" bhakti. That is how we use it. But here, "ahaitukam" refers to
causeless in the sense of being logicless. Senseless. So, it is not in the sense
of being transcendental. Or unmotivated. Or pure. It is in the sense of having
no rationale basis. Having no intelligent basis to things. "atattvārtha-vad
alpaṁ ca". "atattvārtha-vad". So, that, which does not have any
"tattvārtha-vad". That which does not have any, you know, you know, true meaning
to it. "tattvārtha". True meaning. You know. True meaning to it. "alpaṁ ca". And
that deals with a, only a, you know, part of reality. It only looks, it is
on..., it is meager knowledge. It is not complete knowledge. So, "tat tāmasam
udāhṛtam". That is knowledge in the mode of ignorance. Let us try to understand
this further. You know. So, Krishna is not, you know, calling specific things as
ignorance. Or knowledge in mode of ignorance. But He is giving the generic
characteristics. And depending on time, place, circumstance, depending on the
various different schools of thought that are present at different times. Some
of them will be, can be classified in goodness. Some in passion. And some in
ignorance. Now, here, you know, you know, Krishna, first of all, Krishna's, you
know, explanation is in terms of knowledge which makes one attached to one
fragment of reality. "ekasmin". "kār...", "ekasmin". "kārye saktam". That one
becomes it, too attached to one fragment of reality as if it is the complete
reality. "yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin". "ekasmin". One thinks of one thing to be
complete. "kārye saktam ahaitukam". And one is too attached to things not
understanding that completeness. Not understanding their reality. Totality. So,
for example, we have materialism today. Materialism is, you know, widespread,
you know, school of thought. When materialism is often considered to be
progressive. People think that when we are becoming materialistic, they think
that, we are, you know, giv..., giving up the old fashion. Prescientific. You
know. Mythology based ideas of different religious dogmas. But, you know, you
know, what does materialism actually have as its end result? Materialism
essentially leads to, you know, assuming a part of reality, that is matter to be
the totality of reality. And it is obviously an incomplete part of reality. You
know. We are not matter based creatures. We are spirit based creatures. Matter
is something which is our outer covering. It is not our inner substance. So,
when we mistake the outer covering to be both, not to, not just outer. But also
inner. To be everything. Then, that leads to, you know, that leads to knowledge
in the mode of ignorance. So, what is this knowledge in the mode of ignorance?
So, it is knowledge, means, now, if we look at, there are many materialistic
thinkers. And in their own way, they are, you know, they have their own logic.
They have their own intellectual brilliance. And by that, they try to explain
things. But, you know, you know, the problem is, their vision is unidimensional.
They have reduced a polydimensional reality. That which is polydimensional.
Polydimensional means there are many aspects to reality. There is matter. There
is spirit. And there is the Supreme Lord. Who is the source of matter and
spirit. So, there are multiple aspects to reality. They have just taken one
aspect of it. And assumed it to be the totality of reality. And then, based on
this misconception, they try to analyse and explain how, you know, you know,
everything has come about. So, therefore, when a mother feels love for a child.
They try to explain. Or, you know, how it is nothing, but some secretion of
chemicals in the brain. And just because certain biochemicals are secreted in
the brain. That is how they try to explain emotions. And that is how these
reductionistic materialists, they try to explain everything in terms of matter.
So, you know, you know, Bhaktivinoda Thakur talks about such knowledge. You
know. That:

      jivake karaye gadha

So, he says that, such knowledge, what does it do? There is knowledge. But it
makes a person know better than an animal like a donkey. So, people work very
hard. And working hard itself is not bad. But working hard for a meaningful
purpose is desired. Not for a valueless pur..., not for something which is
not actually valuable. So, "yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin". "ekasmin". One takes
only one aspect of reality. And assumes it to be the complete reality. "kārye
saktam ahaitukam". "kārye saktam". When one is attached. And one becomes, you
know, you know, without analogical basis. You know. Nobody has exp...,
demonstrated how, say, matter has, you know, led to the emergence of
consciousness. Nor has it been explained, you know, you know, theoretically
wha..., to any reasonable degree of satisfaction. And yet, that is assumed to be
the default way of looking at things today. You know. So, going back to
Bhaktivinoda Thakur's avidya..., "Vidyara Vilase" song. So, he says that:

        jaḍa-vidyā jata, māyāra vaibhava,
        tomāra bhajane bādhā

You know. "jaḍa-vidyā jata". "jaḍa-vidyā jata". "jaḍa" refers to matter. Which
is unconscious. Which i..., lacks in consciousness. So, it is called "jaḍa".
"jaḍa-vidyā jata, māyāra vaibhava,". 08:00
