Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ltaqb0hMqjA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_127_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.01-15.06_-_Understanding_the_metaphor_of_the_upside-down_tree_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=ltaqb0hMqjA&redir_token=4lXNFIfDo8-tRfXoLFAgLttglS58MTU0ODQ4OTcyOEAxNTQ4NDAzMzI4&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the 15th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. You know. We are discussing currently
the, you know, you know, jnana section. And in this section, you know, Krishna
is systematically establishing how jnana culminates in bhakti. So, in the 13th
Chapter, you know, He talked about the six items. "puruṣaṁ". "prakṛtiṁ".
"jñānaṁ". "jñeyaṁ". "kṣetraṁ". "kṣetra-jñam". And based on that, He explained
how, you know, bhakti is the ultimate goal of life. You know, or how, you know,
it is by bhakti that one can understand the prop..., gain a proper understanding
of this. And that was elaborated further in the 14th Chapter through the
analysis of the three modes of material nature. By which, you know, it was
understood that if one wants to transcend the modes, one has to, you know, you
know, v..., take shelter of devotional service. And that devotional service
ultimately culminates in understanding that Krishna is the, you know, f...,
support. The foundation of Brahman. You know. You know. You know. Now, in, after
this, you know, after concluding the 14th Chapter with, you know, emphasising,
you know, that Bhagavan is superior to bhakti. Then, Krishna, you know, you
know, elaborates on that theme in a different way. He elaborates on a theme of
how Bhagavan is the ultimate reality. By emphasising how Bhagavan is the
ultimate goa..., you know, is the, you know, you know, "puruṣottama". He is the
greatest person. Because this chapter is called as "Purushottama Yoga". The, you
know, you know, as Prabhupada translates it, "The Yoga of the Supreme Person".
So, let us look at, you know, Chapter 15 overview. You know. You know. You know.
You know. So, verses 1 to 6 are attaining liberation by detachment. And then,
for this, the, you know, you know, example of the, the metaphor of the
upside-down banyan tree is given. Then, verses, you know, 7 to 11 say that, ok,
if one does not attain liberation. Then, what will happen? There will be
bondage. And transmigration. You know. Now, in verses 12 to 15, you know,
thereafter, s..., ok, if you want to get out of this bondage by transmigration.
How will that happen? You know. That is by Krishna's mercy. So, we see, while we
are transmigrating material existence. How Krishna assists us. In our material
existence. And in our spiritual endeavor. That is talked about in verses 12 to
15. Then, verses 16 to si..., 18 talk about the essence of Vedanta. How Krishna
is "puruṣottama". This is often called as, also called as the Tri-Shloki Gita.
You know. You know. You know. You know. And then, verses 19 to 20 talk about to
know Krishna means to know everything. You know. So, that means Krishna, the
same point of the Tri-Shloki Gita is emphasised further in the last two verses.
Where it is said that this knowledge of Krishna is the most confidential
knowledge. And one who knows this, knows everything. So, you know, you know,
this is, you know, the, among the shortest chapters of the Gita. You know. The
12th and the 15th chapters. Both have 20 verses each. So, when both have 20
verses each, that means that, you know, both are, you know, you know, having
significant amounts of, you know, you know, information. Knowledge. Wisdom. That
has, you know, given in, condensed in, con..., concentrated form in these
chapters. So, we saw how 12th Chapter ha..., con..., talks about very important
concepts. About, you know, the, how Brahman, how, how it is better to worship
Krishna tha..., you know, personal form than impersonal. How there is a
descending ladder of mercy at various levels at which we can practice bhakti.
And in the qualities of devotees. Those are three things. So, in this fif...,
15th Chapter, Krishna is talking about through endea..., physical analysis, the
importance of taking shelter of Him. You know. You know. So, let us look, where,
let us start with the first verse. You know. You know. You know.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham
        aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam
        chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni
        yas taṁ veda sa veda-vit

You know. So, "ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham". "ūrdhva-mūlam". That means, you know,
that which is above. You know. You know. You know. "aśva...". "adhaḥ-śākham".
You know. You know. So, the, you know, the roots are above. And the branches are
below. "adhaḥ-śākham". You know. "aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam". "aśvattham".
"aśvattham" is the, you know, you know, the, a tree. Banyan tree. Prabhupada
translates it as. "prāhur avyayam". It is said to be imperishable. "prāhur"
means it is said to be imperishable. "chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni". "parṇāni" are
its leaves. So, its leaves are the chandas. The, you know, you know, Vedic
hymns. And "yas taṁ veda". One who knows this. This what? This whole tree. In
its totality. "yas taṁ". "sa veda-vit". Such a person is "veda-vit". So, "yas
taṁ veda sa veda-vit". You know. You know. You know. You know. "veda-vit" means
one who is the knower of the Vedas. So, it is significant that Krishna says that
the leaves are the Vedic hymns. And, you know, just knowing the leaves alone is
not enough. That means, just knowing the Vedas enough. Vedic hymns alone does
not make one "veda-vit". You know. To become "veda-vit", one has to have the
comp..., know the complete tree. So, Krishna has also also earlier talked about
how:

        trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā
        nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna

In 2.45, He has said that, the more, Vedas talk about things within the three
modes. So, go beyond the three modes, oh, Arjuna. Similarly, He has talked
earlier about how, you know, you know, you know, "śabda-brahmātivartate". The
transcendentalist who is going in an earthly lifetime journey. You know. You
know. When co..., you know, comes close to perfection. Krishna explains in 6.43
and 44. That such a person is attracted spontaneously by the principles of
spirituality. And go..., goes beyond, you know, karma kanda. He goes beyond the
range of fruitive activities. Which are talked about in the Vedic literature.
So, therefore, you know, you know, "veda-vit". Who, "veda-vit" means one who is
the knower of the Vedas. The one who is the knower of the Vedas should not just
know the Vedic hymns. They are only the leaves within the three. But the leaves
are only one part of the, you know, tree. Along with the leaves, you know, you
know, there is so many other parts. And although, the other parts, 07:22
