Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3WnMUIeqBn0
Audio: ?

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 18th Chapter. We discussed the first section of the, the 18th Chapter
where Krishna is telling how action with detachment, action with the mood of
renunciation is far better than the renunciation of action. So, let us look at a
few analytical points. We have discussed this until verse 9. But let us look at
a few analytical points over here. You know. So, this is the overview of the
chapter. We are in, right now, in the first section on karma-yoga. That it is
better to do one's activities than to renounce one, to renounce activity. So, we
discussed about, you know, kaya. And about sannya..., nitya karma. And ni...,
nitya karma. So, now, we will see some important point. You know. How action in
renunciation, which ultimately culminates in bhakti, you know, integrates the
virtues of both. You know. Karma, here, we had, discussing these three paths.
Karma. Jnana. And bhakti. So, here, bhakti is more or less karma with the
detachment. And attachment, with detachment to matter and attachment to Krishna.
Karma here refers not to karma-yoga. It refers to karma-kanda. So, the positive
of karma is that it is natural. So, the positive of karma is that it is natural.
We all want to be active. You know. But the negative of karma is that most of
the actions that we do cause bondage in material existence. Then, a positive of
jnana is that it is liberating. You know. Because one is not going to get into
activity. You know. It is slowly liberating. But the prob..., negative is that
being inactive is unnatural. So, in he..., in Hegelian analysis, Hegel was a
European thinker, so, he though..., he had the idea that first one proposes one
particular idea. That is thesis. Then, one tries to counter that idea. That is
antithesis. And then, one combines both thesis and antithesis together. And
then, one arrives at a synthesis. Synthesis means a higher understanding which
integrates the virtues of both the contrary schools of thought. You know. While
removing their blemishes. So, we will see how bhakti is a synthesis. You know.
So, when we act out of devotion of the Supreme Lord. Action is natural. But
because that action is not motivated by our own desires, it is motivated for, by
the longing to serve the Lord. So, it is non-libera..., non-binding. It is
liberating. So, in this way, bhakti is natural as well as liberating. And the
negatives of both. That is binding. Our natural are removed. So, this is the
spirit in which we act. So, now, when we talk about jnana, there are different
kinds of jnanis. So, those who do not practice bhakti at all. They are just
perpetuating jnana sadhana. There is, also practice bhakti. But offend the
Lord's form. They both fall back. This is what Chakravarti Pada explains. And
there is practice bhakti to attain "sayujya". So, this is referred to by 12.3,
4, 5. And again, it will come in 18..., 18.54-55. And practice bhakti. And by
devotee association, attain prema. They are the topmost jnanis. So, we will
discuss about these jnanis, you know, more when we come to 18.54 and 55. But
suffice it to say that the word jnani should not be equated just with mayavadis
all the time. So, Krishna has said earlier that "naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet".
That if one, you know, renounces out of, you know, you know, you know, you know,
frustration because "kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet", then "tyāga", we will not get
the "phalaṁ" of "tyāga". Renunciation itself is not the fruit. Our goal for
renunciation is purification and illumination. We want to be free from our
anarthas. And we are going to get higher understanding. So, misery can be an
initial spark. But not a sustainer for renunciation. This is fi..., if you want
sustainer, then, and there has to be philosophical conviction. And there has to
be devotional attraction. So, we discussed this earlier. The renunciation is not
of lack of ambition. But it is superambition. Renounced not because what the
world offers is too tough. But too little. One who renounces, the person thinks
that, oh, there must, the, oh, even the most glamorised happiness in this world
is so temporary. There must be some higher happiness in life. And I want that
higher happiness. You know. You know. You know. In material life, the pleasure
is not worth the trouble. Whereas in spiritual life, the happiness is worth
whatever the trouble is required. So, you know, now, we are going forward.

        kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet

That is what we had discussed in an earlier verse. So, "kāya-kleśa" is trouble
for the body. Now, Krishna has selen, seven, sold in 17.5 and 6 that do not
torment the body unnecessarily. You know.

        māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ
        tān viddhy āsura-niścayān

So, Krishna talks about those who trouble, the, torment their bodies out of a
false sense of illusion. And, you know, they are, you know, you know, they are
foolish. So, do not, you know, Krishna says that they are demoniac, actually, He
says. But then, He sa..., so, there, He is, there are two extremes. One is by
torment the body. And the other is we pamper the body. And if some, if any
activity causes us trouble, we want to give it up. Even if it is a prescribed
duty. So, that is also not good. That means we focus not on what causes trouble.
Or what gives pleasure. But on what will be required for bringing about
purification. Elevation. And liberation. So, accept bodily trouble when it is
necessary for the sake of duty. Prabhupada's standard example is that when we,
you know, have to take, bathe in the morning. Or a wi..., housewife has to cook
in the summer. Like that. So, this is what we have discussed until now. Now, let
us move forward. And discuss from 18.10 onwards. So, in, you know, until now,
18.7 to 9, Krishna has talked about "tyāgaḥ" in the three modes. Now, He will
colla..., elaborate on how "tyāgaḥ" will lead to liberation. You know. How, now
"tyāgaḥ" in terms of "tyāgaḥ" in goodness will lead to liberation.

        na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma
        kuśale nānuṣajjate
        tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo
        medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ

So, "na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma". "akuśalaṁ karma" is that work which is
inauspicious. "kuśalaṁ" can mean expert. It can mean, you know, expertise in
terms of that which brings good results. So, there is some works which cause,
which are pleasurable to us. Some ways which go, which are unpleasant to us.
But, you know, "na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma". So, it is some works which we do not
like to do. But still, we do them. Because it is duty. "kuśale nānuṣajjate". And
some works we like to do. But that does not mean that, we just, you know, we
just keep doing them. And forget that there is a higher reality to life. So,
bo..., either way, one does not let the material dominate one's conceptions.
"tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo". So, such a person is a "tyāgī". Who is neither
attached. Nor averse. "sattva-samāviṣṭo". Such a person is absorbed in
"sattva-guna". You know. In goodness, absorbed. "medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ".
"medhāvī". Such a person is truly intelligent. Because that intelligence has
been able to comprehend that the material does not have to have a monopoly on
the emotional. That means all our emotions do not have to be restricted to
material things. We can have em..., emotions for higher things, also. You know.
So, "medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ". "chinna-saṁśayaḥ". "chinn...", you know, that
person's, all doubts are removed. Because that person has understood that, you
know, the art of work is of to work with detachment. Otherwise, one has so many
doubts. If I do this, will I get enjoyment? Or if I get the enjoyment, will I
also get bondage? How can I save myself from bondage? Should I renounce all the
work? All this "saṁśayaḥ" is there. All the "saṁśayaḥ"s go away for a person who
acts, who is "medhāvī". And who acts in karma-yoga. So, at this point, Krishna
is talking about karma-yoga. And how this karma-yoga will mature into bhakti
yoga? Krishna will explain in the later part of this chapter. Prabhupada
explains everything from the perspective of bhakti yoga over here. Let us move
forward. Which is what? So, bhakti yoga will come later on. Prabhupada is giving
us everything from the point of view, the conclusion. You know. Now, the
question may be, some people may say that, why should one work? You know. If one
wants to avoid bondage, it is best to avoid work, also. Then, there will be no
bondage. So, then, Krishna is telling over here, actually, that is not possible.

        na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ
        tyaktuṁ armāṇy aśeṣataḥ
        yas tu karma-phala-tyāgī
        sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate

You know. You know. "na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ". You know. You know. "śakyaṁ". It
is not possible, oh, Arjuna, "śakyaṁ". For "deha-bhṛtā". For one, who is a
living entity, having a body. "deh...", "deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ". "tyaktuṁ karmāṇy
aśeṣataḥ". To give all work up completely. Comp..., "aśeṣataḥ". 09:06
