Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fun4PlUnAfY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_118_-_Bhagavad_Gita_13.01-13.03_-_Understanding_the_concept_of_kshetra_from_multiple_perspectives_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=fun4PlUnAfY&redir_token=B_CXs2zBUur2XeZzHUADYxXHUX58MTU0ODQ4OTQ2OUAxNTQ4NDAzMDY5&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the Thirteenth Chapter beginning with the jnana section of the Bhagavad
Gita. Chapters 1 to 12 was about karma. And how karma leads to bhakti. Chapter
7 to 12 is about how, bhakti. And Chapters 13 to 18 is about jnana. And how
jnana leads to bhakti. So, here, the Thirteenth Chapter begins with a question
from Arjuna. And as we have discussed earlier, the, you know, you know, Tenth
Chapter, not necessarily the beginning. But in the Tenth Chapter, you know,
after Kri..., Krishna starts speaking in the eleventh verse of Chatur Shloki
Bhagavad Gita. Arjuna asks a question. And that, you know, leads the discussion
forward. So, in the 10th, 11th, 12th and 13th Chapters, the topics of discussion
are generated by Arjuna's questions. You know. So, now, we may ask, what
generates Arjuna's questions? It is not necessary that, you know, something in
the previous chapter, normally, ha..., necessarily has to lead to that question.
You know. Yes. We discussed how m..., in the, you know, tenth Chapter, you know,
you know, in the Eleventh Chapter, the question comes from the Tenth Chapter.
Eleventh Chapter. At the end of the 10th Chapter, Krishna has said that in 10.42
that "ekāṁśena sthito jagat". That by My one fragment, I pervade the whole, you
know, creation. I pervade and sustain the whole creation. So, then, based on
that, Arjuna asks the question, can you show me the "Virata rupa"? But there is
only one of the stimula, one of the stimulants for that question. Another
question is, another stimulant also is that, you know, Arjuna wants to have a,
you know, visual, verifiable demonstration of Krishna's supremacy for all time
as is pramana. As a standard. You know. You know. And then, in the Tenth Chapter
itself, the question on "vibhuti" is not necessarily immediately related with
something before. It is, you know, they are based on the understanding that, you
know, yes, Krishna, one has to think about Krishna, but it is difficult to think
about Krishna at all times. So, how can one think about Krishna within material
nature? In the Twelfth Chapter, question is not immediately related with the
Eleventh Chapter. You know. And Thirteenth Chapter question is also not
immediately related with the Twelfth Chapter. Or anything that comes before
that. The Bhagavad Gita is a discussion which happens, it, in different ways.
You know. Sometimes, when we meet, you know, a learned teacher. You know. That
learned teacher may speak on one subject. And after the class is over, we may
not restrict ourselves to asking questions only with relative, respect to that
subject. You know. If we have some general philosophical doubts, also. We may
ask those. So, similarly, when Arjuna asks questions, his questions are not
necessarily limited or connected, you know, to what was discussed earlier.
Arjuna is living in a Vedic culture. And there are many terms. Which ha..., he
has already heard. And he would like to have those terms clarified. So, we
discussed earlier how terms are verbal. And concepts are intellectual. So, both
need to be clarified. So, for example, in the Twelfth Chapter, when he asks
about, you know, who are better situ..., who are more intimately united with
Him? Those who worship the personal manifestation? Or the impersonal
manifestation? So, you know, that is a conceptual clarification. They do not
un..., necessarily have any specific terms involved. But now, here, Kri...,
Arjuna in the Thirteenth Chapter, when he asks the question, he will be using
some specific terms.

Of course, those terms are associated with concepts. But he is asking, what do
those terms mean? So, let us look at the Thirteen Chapter overview. And then, we
will go into the verses one by one. So, we have Arjuna's six questions. You
know. In the six questions. There is Kshetra. And Kshetra-jna. You know. for,
so, Arjuna, so, those questions are answered progressively by Krishna. So, the
answer to the question about what is Kshetra? And what is the Kshetra-jna? That
is, you know, from verses 2 to 7. You know. So, actually, this is the third and
fourth question which is answered first. Then, what is Jnana is answered in 8 to
12. Then, what is Jneya is answered in 13 to 19. These will be the answer to the
fifth and sixth question. And then, Krishna comes back to answer the first and
second questions. So, that is, what is Prakrti? And what is Purusha? How do they
interact? And then, how does it all come together? So, 27 to 35 is like a bonus
section. Where Krishna offers Jnana-chakshu. The eyes of knowledge. By which,
one can, you know, see reality beyond how it appears at a ma..., material level.
At, you know, material level of perception. So, to see, you know, with
philosophical vision, instead of  just material vision, that is what the last
section enables one to do. So, let us Kri..., now, look at Arjuna's questions.
And Krishna's answer.

        arjuna uvāca

        prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva
        kṣetraṁ kṣetra-jñam eva ca
        etad veditum icchāmi
        jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ ca keśava

So, Arjuna is asking. He is asking six term. What is "prakṛtiṁ"? And what is
"puruṣaṁ"? "kṣet...", "etad veditum icchāmi". Arjuna, Krishna says. "veditum
icchāmi". This, I wish to know. "veditum" is to know. So, "kṣetraṁ kṣetra-jñam
eva ca". That the fie..., know, the "kṣetraṁ" is the field of knowledge. And the
knower. "jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ ca keśava". So, "jñānam" is literally speaking knowledge.
"jñeyam" is that which is to be known. "keśava". So, what, now, these terms are
familiar terms in the Vedic context. But do they exactly mean? That is what
Arjuna wants to know. Now, Krishna replies.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya
        kṣetram ity abhidhīyate
        etad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ
        kṣetra-jña iti tad-vidaḥ

"vidaḥ". So, "idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya". This body. Krishna points to Arjuna's
body. And He says, "idaṁ śarīraṁ". This body, you know, you know, is the
"kṣetram". It is called as "abhidhīyate". "abhidhīyate" means it is known as.
"etad yo vetti". One who knows it. "taṁ prāhuḥ". That en..., that entity is
known as "kṣetra-jña". "iti tad-vidaḥ". You know. So, "tad-vidaḥ" tha..., means
those who know this. "tad-vidaḥ". "vidaḥ" means to know. "tad" is that. So,
Krishna is quoting here the knowers of subject. And knowers of the subject, he
is saying, the knowers call, this body is the "kṣetram". And the, you know,
knower, as kṣetra-jña". So, in one sense, Krishna does not tell who is the
knower. He just says, one who knows it is called as the "kṣetra-jña". Now, you
know, you know, before we go into the technicalities of the verse, first, an
important with respect to pathantara. Pathantara means, you know, in, you know,
traditional culture, when, you know, there were people who were called as
co..., copiers. Or transcribers. You know. They would, you know, you know, you
know, they would, their job was, you know, that they would have to write,
rewrite the scripture. Not in terms of editing. But keeping it same. And
copying it. Because when the scriptures are, there, generation after generation,
you know, they do not last. The paper gets, you know, decayed. The paper gets
spoilt. And then, you know, we have to copy that. And there were no xerox
machines. Or something like that in the past. So, people would have to write
it manually. So, while writing manually, sometimes, that would be a
Pathantan..., so Pathantara Bheda. Bheda means difference. Pathantara means that
there are different, you know, you know, different versions of the same
manuscript. So, this is the technical word used for, this is recension. So,
recension means a different rendition of the manus..., so, manuscript. So, for
example, you know, you know, you know, you know, there will be, there may be
some renditions where some words might be slightly different. So, you know,
there is a, you know, prayer of Prahlada Maharaja where:

        naitan manas tava kathāsu

You know:

        brahmādayaḥ sura-gaṇā munayo ’tha siddhāḥ
        sattvaikatāna-gatayo vacasāṁ pravāhaiḥ
        nārādhituṁ puru-guṇair adhunāpi pipruḥ
        kiṁ toṣṭum arhati sa me harir ugra-jāteḥ

So, here, it is described that, this is the first prayer among the series of
prayers that Prahlada Maharaja offers to Lord Nrsimhadeva. And therein, he
prays that my dear Lord, you know, if, if devatas like Brahmaji, whose words
like a flow of ne..., are of like a flow of nectar, if they could not satisfy
You, I have been lowborn. How can my, my words satisfy you? "maci...", "nār...",
"ārān".

        sattvaikatāna-gatayo vacasāṁ pravāhaiḥ

So, the word here is "gatayo". "gatayo". Now, when some recensions, instead of
"gatayo", it is "matayo". Now, if we look at the overall meaning. The meaning
does not change so much. It remains the same. You know. "gat...", so, "gatayo"
means like the flow. "matayo" means is their opinion. So, either way, if the
word, you know, does not affect much the overall understanding of the verse. So,
like that, there are often recens..., different recensions, with slight, minor
variations among them. And generally, within the traditional circles, whenever
any commentary is written. For, say, Vyasatirtha. Vyasatirtha is a famous Madhva
scholar. When he writes a commentary, generally, for the first thing that he
would do is, he would deal with, you know, the issues of, you know, you know,
differences in various recensions. And he would say, ok, like this is the
recen..., this is recension. I found this verse to be like this. And this
recension, I found this verse to be like this. And this is recension. I found
this verse to be like this. And then, he would address those issues. And he
would give, ok, because this recension is a little older. Or this recension is
more coherent. Or this is the recension in which, you know, which has been,
which is more authorised. Because we have it coming down in the tradition. And
this is what has been commented on. So, then, we, I choose this recension. So,
the, it was, it is well, it is well-known possibility to erase human. And
when humans are copying things, it is always possible that some error can come
up. So, when the error comes up, at that time, you know, how is the error dealt
with? By comparing with various recensions. So, that is a natural thing which is
done. So, as to ensure that, you know, the, you know, you know, the human error
factor is minimised. You know. But overall, when the, you know, scriptures are
preserved in the tradition, then the variations and the recensions become less
and less. And especially if a book has been preserved in the tradition.
Especially for book has been commented on. You know. Then, the commentary is
normally preserved within that tradition. And along with that, the book verse is
also preserved. So, then, it becomes clear. Ok. This is the verse. Which
this particular acharya has commented on. And that way, both remain the same.
So, for example, we have Shridhar Swami's commentary which almost goes down to,
it is almost, you know, nearly, somewhere, like a thousand years old. And, you
know, on the "Bhāgavatam". And we have the "Bhagavad-gītā". The "Bhāgavatam",
today. And we see, practically, all the verses are, you know, the same. So, what
does it indicate? That for a thousand years, things have not changed. And
similarly, we have "Shankaracharya"'s "Bhagavad-gītā". And his commentary. And
similarly, we look at the "Bhagavad-gītā" which we have. And we look that, we,
he is commenting on the same verses. So, the commentaries of different acharyas
may be different. But when the commentary is preserved, along with that, the
verses are also preserved. So, we can say that, at least for a, you know,
thousand, five hundred years, Shankaracharya came almost 1400 years ago. So, the
verses of the Gita also have not changed. And which is, which is remarkable.
Which is indicative of the exter..., enormous amount of care that has been taken
for preserving the fidelity of the scripture. So, when we talk about preserving
the fidelity of the scripture, what exactly do we mean by that?

You know. That means, now, ultimately, the fideli..., the scriptures are not
just texts. Which are, you know, present in some, some manuscript. Some form of,
you know, manuscript. Or some leaves. Or some kind of paper. Or whatever. The
scriptures are also living wisdom. That is present in the hearts of those who
have, you know, internalised the preachings of the scriptures. And have molded
their life accordingly. So, why am I talking about all this right now? Because
in some, you know, generally, even secular scholars of the, of religion, those
who have studied the Bhagavad Gita, they adm..., they acknowledge that Bhagavad
Gita is one of the stablest scriptures in terms of, you know, manuscript. Or in,
in terms of, say, the, you know, agreement in various recensions. So, ma...,
there are pro..., very, very few disagreements in terms of what the content of
the Gita is. So, as I mentioned earlier, there was a commentator called Niva...,
Abhinav Gupta. You know. He tried to prove that the Bhagavad Gita, you know, he
was a Shaivite. Kashmiri Shaivite. And he tried to prove that, you know, the
Bhagavad Gita, at least to the sour..., so, conclusion that Shiva is the Supreme
Per..., Absolute Truth. Now, with his, you know, entirely untenable conclusion.
Because the word Shiva does not come also in the Bhagavad Gita so much. But even
in his commentary, there are not much differences in the verses. So, that means,
even he recognised that he cannot change. That, you know, the verses are the
same. And the verses cannot be changed. Because there are so many copies of that
book available. And if one, somebody just tries to change the, inserts some
words. Or remove some verse. Then, it creates a lot of, you know, then, it will
immediately be caught when pointed out. You know. That time, you know, although
the modern means of technology were not there. But still, you know, the verse,
you know, severe and serious intellectual, intellectual competition, you could
say. When warfare among the various schools of thought that were prevalent. And
everybody had to use logic. And scripture to establish the, you know, validity
and veracity of their school of thought. You know. So, we could, you know, we
could go, go around people. Go play. Go playing around, changing the scri...,
content of the scripture itself. So, the point is, in some recensions of the
Gita, although the Gita overall is very stable, 13.1 is not present. 13.1 is
Arjuna's question. So, now, for argument sake, even if we say, Arjuna had never
asked this question. Actually, it makes no difference. Because essentially, even
without Arjuna's question, the topic is slightly, you know, tangent. You know.
You know. Even if there is no question by Arjuna, what Krishna is going to speak
is not going to change. That the verses are there as it is. And within the
question itself begs itself. Why did the, you know, you know, you know, why did
Arjuna, Krishna suddenly start speaking on this topic of "kṣetram". And
"kṣetra-jña". And "pur...", and "jñānaṁ". And "jñeyaṁ". And "puruṣaṁ". And
"prakṛtiṁ". So, our acharyas have generally included this verse in the, you
know, in their commentaries in the Gita. In their, as a, as a, as the starting
of the, you know, you know, Chapter 13. So, some traditions called as, may not
include it. And we do not have to get into a debate over that. If we look at
the, you know, you know, you know, question, it brings some sort of context and
continuity to the topic that Krishna takes up. And, you know, without it, there
seems to be sudden, sudden shift. Sudden jump. And, you know, that is why, it
i..., it is tenable that Arjuna would have asked a question. But we do not have
to be absolutely insistent about it. If some people want to face, say, that no.
no. This verse is not there. Ok. It is not there. In the normal Gita, in the
Gita press. Gita, which is widely distributed in India. The, Arjuna's question
is often not kept over there.

So, either way, the important point is not the presence or absence of the
question. The important point is the, you know, con..., understanding the
concepts that are talk..., you know, explained over here. So, let us go to those
concepts. So, it is, so, even, so, that means even if the verse is not there as
a question. Still, then, all, what we do accept is Krishna suddenly starts
talking about different topic. Then, why does Krishna suddenly start of, talking
of a different topic? Because, you know, Krishna wants to clarify concepts
further. Krishna has explained, you know, you know, how bhakti is superior to
jnana. And so, you know, is to impersonal worship. Which is also part of jnana.
But now, Krishna wants to clarify other terms. So, there is sankhya. You know.
Sankhya. This word has come earlier in the Third, Four..., you know, Fourth and
Fifth, Third and Fifth Chapters especially. You know. You know. Sankhya has
come. You know. So, it has, you know, so, sankhya is analysis of material
nature. Into its components. So that one can go beyond an ultimately, attain
through a clear understanding of what lies beyond matter. So, the material world
has so much, you know, variety. Which is quite captivating. And bewildering.
That we just get caught up in the forms. And the appearances. But once one
understands that these un..., forms and appearances are made by some fundamental
elements. And they themselves are not very captivating. You know. If just air is
blowing along. You know. Air is not going to captivate me. Nor is water going to
captivate me. It is not that, if say, a wat..., a glass of water is going to
present, you know, captivate for me. It is not that I am going to be constantly
lost. Fascinated. Finding the whole thing irresistible. No. I will be wanting
to, you know, you know, just get a, you know, get a, you know, get drink water.
If I need it. If I am thirsty. But otherwise, I will not be at all concerned
about it. It is not going to distract me so much. So, when we look at, analyse
the material world into its components. Then, we understand, these components
are not very attractive. There is no need for me to get captivated by it, these
material things. And then, we can go beyond. And look at what is it that brings
us alive? What is it the real substance? What is it that actually is, you know,
the basis of life? And, you know, love? And that way, go f..., to the spiritual
reality where there is a soul. And there is ultimately the Supersoul. So, here,
the focus is on, you know, analysing matter. And its interaction with
consciousness. So, Srila Prabhupada called this Chapter as "Nature, the Enjoyer
and Consciousness". "Nature, the Enjoyer and Consciousness". So, now, you know,
how does this nomenclature come about? "Nature, the Enjoyer and
Consciousness". So, there is, you know, what is Krishna's question? Sorry.
Arjuna's question is? What is "kṣetraṁ"? What is "kṣetra-jñam"? What is
"puruṣaṁ"? What is "prakṛtiṁ"? What is "jñānaṁ"? And what is "jñeyaṁ"? So, in
this, if you see, generally speaking, one of them is conscious. The other is not
so much. So, "prakṛtiṁ" is not conscious. "kṣetraṁ" is not conscious. "jñeyaṁ"
is conscious. "prak...", "puruṣaṁ" is conscious. You know. And, you know,
"puruṣaṁ" is conscious. So, "jñeyaṁ". "puruṣaṁ". And "kṣetra-jñam". They are
conscious. So, now, we will, we, as we move forward, we will see how these, you
know, terms. You know. They basically refer..., there are three entities which
have been talked about. So, there is "Ja...", as we have discussed earlier. The
tattva-traya. Jiva. Jagat. Jiva. And Jagadish. So, Jagat is, refers to material
nature. So, that is "prakṛtiṁ". And "puruṣaṁ". So, it is "prakṛtiṁ". And
"kṣetra-jñ...", "kṣetraṁ". Then, Jiva i..., Jiva can be that the "prakṛtiṁ". You
know. Sorry. Jiva can be the "puruṣaṁ". Or Jiva can be the "kṣetra-jñam".
Similarly, Ishvara can be the "kṣetra-jñam". Or such a, Ishvara can be the
"kṣetraṁ". You know. It can be the "puruṣaṁ", also. We will discuss this as we
move forward. It is, right now, it might seem a little bit abstract. And
confusing. But the point is these three entities. So, "Nature" basically refers
to material nature. You know. "The Enjoyer" refers to the Jagad..., Jaga...,
Ishvara. That is Supreme Lord. And "Consciousness" refers to the Jiva. That is
why Prabhupada uses this name. You know. So, now, let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's purport. You know. So:

"That field of activity is the body."

You know. You know. You know. So, now, what is exactly the, you know, meaning of
"kṣetram"? Now, "kṣetraṁ" is a part of "prakṛtiṁ". "prakṛtiṁ" is material
nature. Now, all around me. All around you is material nature. But we cannot
control all of material nature. We can control only some of its parts. You know.
For example, if I am sitting here, I can, I am able to move my hand up and down.
But I cannot move your hand up and down. You know. I cannot, you know, control
material nature beyond what is my jurisdiction of influence. So, the "kṣetraṁ"
refers to the area of influence. So, at a phi..., preliminary level, the
"kṣetraṁ" is the bo..., body. All of us have some exp..., influence over the
body. Of course, we do not have complete influence. Or complete control over the
body. There is much that happens in the body at a subconscious level. You know.
You know. And that means not subconscious in the, psychologically subconscious.
I am talking about, here subconscious in terms of involuntary. Right now, I am
breathing. So, I am not conscious that I am breathing. So, similarly, all of you
are breathing. Inside your body, blood circulation is happening. Digestion is
happening. You know. So, all these are happening at an involuntary level. And we
are not conscious of them. But still, we do have some influence over what happens
to the body. And what we can do with the body. So, this is our ordained
"kṣetraṁ". And different living entities have different levels of "kṣetraṁ".
An amoeba has a very, very tiny "kṣetraṁ". You know. Its body, there is inside
the amoeba, is also a soul. But inside, but that soul, because of past karma, has
been given a "kṣetraṁ" with a very small influence. Of course, it may also have
its power in its own ways. You know. You know. It can, you know, it can also,
you know, you know, fulfill its needs for eating, sleeping, mating, defending.
It also has its defend mechanisms. It also has its ingestion mechanism. It also
has its reproduction mechanism. So, in that sense, it is there. But beyond that,
you know, the important thing is that we have to recognise this particular
overall understanding of scrip..., you know, scripture to be not indicative of,
you know, the, you know, specifics involved. But of the broad principles
involved. What do I mean by this? Actually, when we talk about "kṣetraṁ". The
word in a very narrow sense. The word "kṣetraṁ" can refer to a field. So,
agriculture. You know. Agriculture. A farmer has a field. That is a narrow
sense. But in a generic sense, the word, for, "kṣetraṁ" is used for many other
functions. That is also used for, you know, what is your field? That means, may,
are you engineer? Are you a doctor? Are you a business executive? Are you a, you
know, some kind of specialist? Or what? So, that is what is your field. So, the
word field has many meanings. So, that means, when I say that, you know,
somebody is an instrumentation control engineer. What does that mean? That means
that person has that, the expertise in that field, has some amount of cont...,
control and mastery in that field. So, like that, all of us have our "kṣetraṁ".
So, an eagle has been given a, by the past karma that the soul has done
earlier, the sou..., some, that particular soul has been given the body of an
eagle. And then, you know, eagle flies. Fearlessly. As a, you know, as an eagle
over there. So, like that, there are different living entities which act in
different ways. And all these living entities, which act in different ways, are
all, you know, you know, focusing on simply one thing. That one thing is the
practice of, you know, you know, spiritual, you know, they, they are trying to
fulfill their desires in terms of eating. Sleeping. Mating. And defending.

And beyond that, they are not involved, you know, in any further metaphysical
quest. But in the human form, the "kṣetraṁ" has become a little more evolved. Or
rather, our interaction with the "kṣetraṁ" has become much more involved. You
know. The scientists may say that, you know, we have brai..., more brain
substance than animals. Than monkeys. And our brain cells are capable of, you
know, more, you know, data processing. You know. That may be true. But, you
know, that is a facility that has been provided. There is, the soul that is
consciousness. Soul, the conscious soul is using this facility for doing, you
know, more, you know, more ratiocination. Ratio..., more and deep thinking. More
intellection. So, it is like, you know, a child may have a small device with a
little bit remote. So, it, the child has a toy. You press this button. The toy
starts. And then, Press the, swap the button. The toy starts. So, they are the,
the, even if there is some icey chip or something like that inside that remote
device. You know. That is a very preliminary technology. Now, if that child is
given a sophisticated laptop with all kinds of, you know, applications. The
child's intelligence will be limited. And the child will not be able to do much
more, much with that laptop. F..., why? Because the child does not have the
intelligence about how to use the laptop. So, you know, scientists did an
experiment. They had an idea that, you know, everything in, come by chance. So,
they took some monkeys. This is a, this is, this is, this a real experiment
which was done by scientists. They took some mon...,  monkeys. A ba..., dozen
monkeys. And they placed them in a sealed room with transparent wall..., walls.
And they placed twelwe computers in front of them. One computer for each monkey.
And then, their idea was, one of the scientists had made a claim that, you know,
if we just give a, give a monkey enough time. And let the monkey type. Type.
Type. Type. Then, what will happen? The monkey will, you know, actually be able
to, you know, the, go ahead. And, you know, you know, write the whole Hamlet.
The monkey will be able to write the whole Hamlet. How does that work out? The
monkey is able to write the whole Hamlet. Because the, ultimately, everything
happens by chance. So, the monkey can also keep typing. Typing. And if it keeps
typing, then it can eventually write everything. So, when it writes everything
in this way, at that time, you know, it is able to, you know, indicate. This
will be demonstration that ultimately everything can come by chance. So, even
the literary creations which are poetical. You know. Poetic. Or literary
masterpieces. You know. You know. They can also come by chance. Now, but they
put the computer. Put the monkeys in a computer in a computer lab with many
computers. What did the monkeys do? You know. Some monkeys started, you know,
playing with the computer. Some monkeys started passing urine on the computer.
Some monkeys started, you know, beating the computer. And a few monkeys started
typing on it. You know. You cannot control the typing. And then, when they type,
type, type, also. But actually, even if they did it for seven full days. All
that happened was they just got some garbage. You know. No matter how much we
tried to see what has come about, you know, the monkeys do not understand. And
because they do not understand, they cannot produce anything. So, actually, I
have written a whole article about this on my website. And in my science and
specialty book called "when monkeys started typing" So, it is analysis. And it
is, it is indicative of the point that it is not just the technological gadgetry
that is important. Along with the technological gadgetry, there has to be an
evolved intelligence. You know. Which can use that gadgetry. So, the brain is
like the gadgetry.

So, the animals may not be able to do philosophical thought. And, you know, you
know, that is because, somebody may say that is because their brain is not
developed. That is true. The brain is not developed. But the brain is just a
facility. Even if the brain is developed. Say, if an, just like if a chi...,
monkey is placed in front of a computer. That means it is given a f..., you,
device which can ha..., which has much more, more data processing capacity. But
then, it itself does not have the intelligence to use it. So, like that, the
soul, you know, is the source of consciousness. And the soul has to use the
brain. So, the human brain has much more capacity, you know, to, it is a tool.
And it has, it i..., it has a tool. It has more sophistication than the tools
which are animal brains. But still, no matter how sophisticated the tool may be.
The po..., but the, you know, artist, the artism, the person, the, who is using
the tool. That person also has to have that level of capacity. That level of
skills. So, the soul has more evolved consciousness. So, what is, this is
soul's, when we say, soul has more developed consciousness? As, that does not
refer to just the more developed brain. That refers to actually, the subtle body
is also a covering on the soul. And the subtle body, you know, that covering,
"āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena". You know. That s..., covering which is there of
the contamination of lust. Of the contamination of ignorance. That is lesser in
a human body as compared to a, you know, a non-human, subhuman body. So, the
important point recognised here is that the "kṣetraṁ" which we human beings
have, this has greater capacity for spiritual inquiry. And spiritual
realisation than, the other "kṣetraṁ"s have. So, now, this is the "kṣetraṁ". And
Prabhupada explains through the example of a painter how one should not confuse
everything. So, you know, you know, these are, the, you know, the "kṣetraṁ" and
the "kṣetra-jñam" are different. You know. The soul. And the body. Which is
operated, which is being operated by the soul, they are different. So, the body
may have greater capacity. But the soul also has greater capacity in terms of a
more refined. A more developed consciousness by which the soul can perceive
things. You know. You know. You know. You know. So, let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's purport here. You know. So, Prabhupada explains how:

"The owner is distinctly kṣetra-jña."

So, this is the, "kṣetra-jña" means I know my field. So, for example, I am, know
that, ok, I am a male. Or somebody says, I am a female. I am, I am an Indian.
All this is, this awareness is called as "kṣetra-jña". Now, you know, Prabhupada
explains the flow of the chapters, also. And after that, he moves forward. And
then, he goes into the, you know, you know, let us look at the example of the
painter. And it is, comes in the next verse. So, let us go to the next verse
now. So, first, Krishna has described that one who knows this is the
"kṣetra-jñam". So, now, who exactly is the "kṣetra-jñam"? That is 13.3. He will
describe that there are two "kṣetra-jñam" over here.

        kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi
        sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata
        kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ
        yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama

"kṣetra-jñaṁ". So, "kṣetra-jñaṁ". One who is the knower of the "kṣetra". "cāpi
māṁ viddhi". I know that I am also the "kṣetra-jñaṁ". But what, what kind of
"kṣetra-jñaṁ" am I? "sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata". "sarva-kṣetreṣu". That, you know,
you know, I know all the fields. I know all the fields. And then,
"kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ". So, that, the knowledge of "kṣetra" and
"kṣetra-jñaṁ". This knowledge. "yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama". This actually is
what I define in My understanding as knowledge. Krishna is telling. "mataṁ
mama". Now, Krishna may use the word "mataṁ mama". My opinion. In a, you know,
which might seem to decrease the weight. Oh, it is just His opinion. I will
repeat. Different people have different opinions. But, you know, you know, you
know, actually, when Krishna uses the word "mataṁ mama". We understand that He
is the Absolute Truth. And because He is the Absolute Truth, therefore, whatever
He speaks is the ultimate reality. And it, in His, His opinion actually go
insides with reality. Our opinion may also go inside with reality. But there
are varying degrees of coincidences. And there are possibilities of you,
divergences, also, of varying degree depending on how accurate our perception
is. How accurate our judgement is. But Krishna's opinion is the final authority.
Because His opinion completely go insides with reality. That is how it is. And
that is how He sees it. There is no illusion that covers Krishna. Ever. Because
illusion is His potency. And just as the cloud do not s..., cover, do not,
clouds do not cover the Sun. Similarly, the illu..., you know, illusion,
illusory energy does not cover Krishna. 34:03
