Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jkf3N5Eacy0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_126_-_Bhagavad_Gita_14.19-14.27_-_Transcending_the_modes_-_the_inner_characteristics%2C_outer_behavior_and_the_process_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=s5-r4XNxPxN6SR77Ut_RUrngP1Z8MTU0ODQ4OTcwM0AxNTQ4NDAzMzAz&event=video_description&v=jkf3N5Eacy0

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the, you know, 14th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita discussing the last
section. Let us look at the sections of the Gita. 14th Chapter. You know. You
know. So, how it, the soul is conditioned by the modes is verses 1 to 13. Verses
14 to 18 is effect of conditioning by the modes. And verses 19 to 27 talks about
transcending the modes. So, we are just looking, we have looked at verse 19.
Which sa..., you know, said how a person has to understand that, you know, you
know, there is a doer beyond nature. And one, you know, then one can go beyond
the modes. So, now, Krishna is going to describe, in the next verse, a further
element in this. So, let us look at 14.20.

        guṇān etān atītya trīn
        dehī deha-samudbhavān
        janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair
        vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute

You know. You know. You know. "guṇān etān". You know. So, "guṇān etān". All
these modes, "atītya trīn". "atītya" means to go beyond. "trīn" is three. When
one goes beyond the three modes:

        guṇān etān atītya trīn
        dehī deha-samudbhavān

"dehī". You know. You know. You know. The person who is in the body,
"deha-samudbhavān". So, that which is born with the body.
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". So, Krishna has talked about
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-". So, Krishna refers back to that by talking about
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā" over here. Basically, them, it refers to the miseries of
material existence. You know. The, so, these miseries are born with the body.
"dehī deha-samudbhavān". That with the body, these miseries come. And
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". The miseries of, you know, birth. Old age. And
death. "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". One becomes liberated from them. And one attains
eternity. "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". You know. You know. You know. Now, Krishna is
telling, basically, over here that, you know, when, when one goes beyond the
three modes, then one goes beyond the miseries which are, of birth. Old age. And
death. You know. Death. That are, you know, born with the body. That appear with
the body. And one attains, you know, immortality. One attains liberated. And
attains immortality. "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". So, Krishna has used the word
"’mṛtam aśnute". Or similar words, you know, several times in the Bhagavad Gita.
In the Second Chapter, in 2.50, Krishna has said:

        yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete
        puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ
        so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate

So, Krishna said, one who stays equipoised in happiness and distress, such a
person attains immortality. You know. So, that is "’mṛtam-tattva". Now, you
know, specifically, "’mṛtam aśnute". You know. So, Krishna has used this in
13.13. When He talks about, you know:

        jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi
        yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute
        anādi mat-paraṁ brahma
        na sat tan nāsad ucyate

So, "jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi". That I will explain the "jñeyaṁ" to you. And
by knowing this "jñeyaṁ", that, what will happen? You know. "yaj jñātvāmṛtam
aśnute". You will attain "amṛtam". You will attain immortality. So, Krishna has
used this word "’mṛtam aśnute" several times. And, you know, you know, the same
phrase "’mṛtam aśnute" comes also, has come also in the Isopanishad. You know.

        avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
        vidyayāmṛtam aśnute 

So:

        vidyāṁ cāvidyāṁ ca yas
        tad vedobhayaḿ saha

In the Isopanishad, when Krishna, you know, when the Isopanishad talks about
"vidyām". And "avidyām". Verses 9, 10, and 11. So, there, verse 11 says that
both "vidyām" and "avidyām" should be cultivated by knowledge of "avidyām", one
goes beyond material things. Beyond material existence. And by knowledge of
"vidyām", one attains immortality. So, in this way, "vidyayāmṛtam aśnute". So,
"amṛtam". So, "amṛtam" does not necessarily, just referred, used, referred to
nectar. The word "amṛtam" speficically, you know, you know, you know, in many,
many, you know, food products may have the word "amṛtam" attached to it. You
know. "amṛtam" butter. "amṛtam" medicine. "amṛtam" this. "amṛtam" that. But
actually, you know, none of that is "amṛtam". None of that can ma..., miss, the,
make one immortal. So, often, the word, wo..., "amṛtam" is also used not just in
terms, in the sense of immortality. It is also used in the sense of something
which is delicious. So, you know, you know, you know, just like in, we often use
the word nectar. So, the idea of nectar is something which is delicious. And
something which also prolongs life. So, "amṛtam" is nectar. But when Krishna is
talking here about, you know, "’mṛtam aśnute". He is talking not so much in
terms of the heavenly nectar which tastes delicious. That is one part of it.
That, you know, this is, you know, delicious. It is relishable. But more
importantly is that it is transcendental. That it is eternal. It is that, it is
basically referring to eternity. The idea is that, you know, the, you know, you
know, the relationship between the "amṛtam". The drink and "amṛtam". And the
concept "amṛtam". Concept of "amṛtam" is eternality. Eternity. Immortality. Is
that this immortality is supposed to lead to that immortality. That means, by
drinking the nectar, one attains the supreme immortality. Now, does that happen?
May or may not happen. That will vary. Depending on person to person. But the
important point is, you know, you know, that is what is the goal. So, to attain
immortality. Now, how does one attain immortality? By the, you know, by
realising one's eternal nature. So, we know that, actually, there is the
heavenly svarga. The heavenly svarga. The, the heavenly nectar. The svargi
"amṛtam" does not actually lead to immortality. It simply prolongs life. You
know. You know. When the churning, the milk ocean is done to get the nectar,
that nectar does not actually grant immortality. We have discussed about,
earlier about various levels. So, you know, "amṛa" is not the same as "mṛtya".
So, there is "mṛtya". There is "amṛa". There is chiran jiva. And there is nitya.
We have discussed this earlier. You know. So, "amṛa tva", you know, is just a
very long lifetime like the devatas have as compared to what we human beings
have. But anyway, that is not what is talked about over here. Here, it is the,
co..., understanding of, you know, a state of, state beyond death. A state
beyond destruction. So, how will one und..., attain that? When one goes
beyond, one transcends the modes. So, Krishna is telling over here that, you
know, transcend the modes. Then, one will attain immortality. You know. You
know. So, that means, the modes are what? Keep us in ma..., ma..., ma..., keep
us bound to material existence. And going beyond the modes liberates us from
material existence. So, "guṇān etān atītya trīn". By going beyond these modes,
one will attain immortality. And Krishna has earlier also used, the, talked
about, now, Krishna has talked about the miseries several times. You know. He
has talked about, you know, you know, the, you know, "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-".
Twenty items of jnana. In 13.8-12. And then, after that, He has also talked
about, you know, it in, you know:

        jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya
        mām āśritya yatanti ye
        te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam
        adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

In 7.29, Krishna has talked about "jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya". That those who want,
you know, freedom. Those who want liberation from old age and, you know, death.
So, you know, these, the two, you know, Krishna basically is referring to the
miseries of material existence. So, sometimes, it may refer to them, in two,
sometimes, it may refer to them in three. And sometimes in four. So, in 7.29,
He refers to three. Two. "jarā" and "maraṇa". Old age and death. Here, He says,
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-". So, you know, "janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". Rather.
not "vyādhi-" is not here. Here, the word "vyādhi-" does not come.
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-" comes in 13.8 to 12. And then,
"janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair". So, basically, this is re..., you know, this has
sometimes this cycle. "janma-mṛtyu" cycle, it says. The cycle of birth and
death. Yes. Within that, there is cycle of old age, also. There is the cycle of
disease, also. So, there, it may be refer..., you know, the, it is a way to
offer referring to it. Sometimes, may use two di..., two may be used to, refer,
two remain, you know, two miseries may be referred to. Or three miseries may be
referred to. Or four miseries may be referred to. Basic point is that there is a
miseries of material existence. And "vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute". You know. You know.
Now, after describing this, you know, you know, Krishna has more or less, you
know, you know, completed His discussion. You know. So, reason, or remember that
the 14th Chapter did not start, you know, with, you know, any specific question
of, you know, you know, Krishna. Of Arjuna. You know. Krishna has completed
speaking in the Thirt..., Fifteen, in, in the 13th Chapter about how, if one
understands the difference between "kṣetraṁ" and "kṣetra-jñam". Then, and one
attains, understand the process of, you know, you know, you know, liberation.
From it through "jñāna-cakṣu". Then, one will attain, one will go beyond matter.
One will go, one will attain the supreme destination. So, there, you know, you
know, you know, what binds the "kṣetraṁ" to the "kṣetra-jñam". What binds the
soul to the body, you know, the body and the soul together is the modes. Krishna
has talked about them in 13.22. In, you know, you know, you know:

        puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
        bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān
        kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
        sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

"guṇa-saṅgo ’sya". So, because of contact with the modes. Attachment to the
modes. Association with the modes. So, that, what are those "guṇā"s? How do they
bind? So, Krishna speaks of His own impetus. To explain the concepts more
clearly to Arjuna. So, in the 14th Chapter, at the beginning, Arjuna does not
ask a question. But here, Arjuna will ask a question now. You know. You know.
Krishna has analysed the modes. He has talked about the three modes. And then,
he has talked about the state beyond the three modes. Now, Arjuna will ask
specifically how can one transcend the three modes? And attain the destination
that is beyond the modes? So:

        arjuna uvāca

        kair liṅgais trīn guṇān etān
        atīto bhavati prabho
        kim-ācāraḥ kathaṁ caitāṁs
        trīn guṇān ativartate

"kair liṅgais". "kaiḥ", "liṅgaiḥ" is means, what other characteristics. The
"liṅgaiḥ" means characteristics. So, the, you know, word "liṅgaiḥ" also means
gender. But basically, gender is also bodily characteristic. You know. When a
baby is born, then by, then, you know, what, then by its bodily characteristics,
the gender is known. You know. So, basically, "liṅgaiḥ" can mean gender.
"liṅgaiḥ" can also mean characteristic. You know. So, "kair liṅgais". What other
characteristics? "trīn guṇān etān". "trīn guṇān etān". You know. You know. That
these three "guṇā", the three modes are there. "atīto bhavati prabho". "atīto"
means when, you know, somebody, how, how can, you know, what, what are the
characteristics of one who has transcended the modes? "kim-ācāraḥ". "kim-ācāraḥ"
means, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
what is the behavior? So, first, more or less refers to, the "liṅgaiḥ" refers to
the internal characteristic. "ācāraḥ" refers to the external characteristic.
That is the behavior. And:

        kim-ācāraḥ kathaṁ caitāṁs
        trīn guṇān ativartate

And how can one go beyond the three modes? "kathaṁ". You know. You know. You
know. You know. You know. So, how can one go beyond the modes? You know. That is
by, you know, you know, you know, the pra..., you now, that Krishna will answer
that is by the practice of devotional service. So, basically, there are three
questions over here. You know. The first question is "kair liṅgais". You know.
You know. You know. You know. "kair liṅgais" means what are the
characteristics? That refers to more or less internal characteristics. That will
be answered in verse 22. And 23. Then, you know, you know, you know, 24-25 will
answer "kim-ācāraḥ". And, you know, you know, how are the behavior of such a
person? Then, 25 will answer, you know, sorry, sorry, 26 will answer "kathaṁ
caitāṁs". How can one transcend the modes? You know. You know. Arjuna's question
is natural. You know. You know. Anythin decade is that Arjuna is seriously
contemplating what Krishna is speaking. You know. When a student hears about,
when a small child hears, that, ok, you know, so and so forth, and you know, he
scored such very good marks in the exam. And he topped in that exam. And he, you
know, and became this. This. This. Attained all these laurels. Then, the
question naturally comes up, ok, if that has happened, then how did the person
do it? How did the person attain so many marks? How did the person get so much
benefit? You know. You know. So, the answer for that is, by the, you know,
practice of, you know, you know, you know, by the practice of, you know, you
know, by the practice of studying regularly. In an intelligent, disciplined,
dedicated way. You know. That person attained it. So, similarly, how did one
attain this? By the practice of, you know, by certain practices. Normally, you
know, when we hear about certain heroes. Certain successes. Certain, you know,
you know, models of excellence. Then, naturally, the thought comes in our mind.
Maybe, I can become like that. So, Krishna has heard about, Krishna has spoken
to Arjuna about transcending the three modes. Naturally, Arjuna asks, ok, you
know, you know, you know, can, you know, you know, how, can I transcend the
modes? How do I know who has transcended the modes? And implied in the, idea
also that, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, ok, who,
if Arjuna is in the battlefield. Can Arjuna on the battlefield transcend the
modes? Is that possible? So, that is, all these questions are, you know, there.
And they basically indicate that Arjuna is seriously contemplating whatever He
is speaking. That is why Prabhupada says:

"Arjuna’s questions are very appropriate."

It is an interesting adjective. Appropriate. The appropriate means relevant.
Intelligent. You know. And, you know, important. So, you know, you know, you
know, you know, you know, they are appropriate questions. You know. Now, let us
see what is Krishna's answer. So, Prabhupada com..., combines four verses over
here. In his, in, in, and gives one purport to those four verses. So, the, as I
mentioned, 22 and 23 are, are, are referring, answering the question, "kair
liṅgais". And 24 and 25 are answering "kim-ācāraḥ". So, let us look at these
verses. F..., one by one.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca
        moham eva ca pāṇḍava
        na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni
        na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

You know. You know. So, prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca". "prakā". So, now, what is
Krishna referring to over here? You know. "prakāśaṁ", as we have discussed
earlier, is the characteristic of the mode of goodness. You know. You know. You
know. You know. Krishna has, you know, used this, you know, to refer to, you
know, you know, you know, the mode, the mode of goodness in 14.11:

        sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin
        prakāśa upajāyate

So, you know, "prakāśa" is the characteristic of mode, goodness. Then:

        lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ

In 14.12, Krishna has said "pravṛttir ārambhaḥ". "pravṛttir" is action. Act...,
passionate action according to one's own inclinations. "prav...", passion, that
action. That is "pravṛttir". You know. You know. "prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca". And
"moham eva ca pāṇḍava". "moham eva ca". "moham eva ca" means, there is illusion,
also. So, now, illusion, you know, is the characteristic of the mode of
ignorance. In 14.13, Krishna has said "aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś ca". "moham eva ca
pāṇḍava". So, you know, so, there, also, the word was, "moha" was there.
"aprakāśaḥ". "’pravṛ". "aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś". So, no "prakāśaḥ". No "pravṛttiḥ".
But "moha" is there. So, here, Krishna is giving all three. You know. So, the,
the that means He is saying that these three are the characteristic of the three
modes. And He is using one-one word to represent each of the modes. That when
all these come:

        prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca
        moham eva ca pāṇḍava

When any of these emotions come. When we feel illuminated. When we feel
passionate. You know Hyperactive. And do this. Do this. Do this. And then,
"moham". What anyone has to do. Just do not bother about all these things. When
all this happens, you know, "na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni". You know. You know. That
when this happens, one does not resent. And "na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati". Let me,
when it comes, one does not resent it. When it goes, one does not crave for it.

        na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni
        na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

You know. In this way, when one lives, then:

        udāsīna-vad āsīno
        guṇair yo na vicālyate

"udāsīna-vad āsīno". You know. How is one situated? "udāsīna". Now, it is
interesting. Krishna has used almost the same phrase, you know, to, you know, to
refer to his own situation. You know. You know. He has said that "udāsīna-vad
āsīno". In, you know, you know, 9.9. You know:

        na ca māṁ tāni karmāṇi
        nibadhnanti dhanañ-jaya 
        udāsīna-vad āsīnam
        asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu

He says "udāsīna-vad āsīnam", That, actually, one is situated detached. As if
detached. "udāsīna". "guṇair yo na vicālyate". You know. You know. You know. So,
Krishna has said that means, just as the Supersoul is situated li..., detached,
similarly, the soul becomes situated detached. "udāsīna-vad āsīnam". You know.
You know. You know. You know. So, when one is situated like this. "udāsīna-vad
āsīnam". Then, what happens? You know. Actually, when one is situated thus:

        na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni
        na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

"na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni". That, that means, you know, you know, when one
observes. But one does not get excited by it. One understand, ok, now, I am,
you know, now, the mode of passion is coming. Now, the mode of ignorance is
coming. One understands. But one does not get excited by it. One does not get
agitated by it. One neither craves for it. Nor laments about it. That means
basically, one has to, observes. So, here, Krishna is talking about a very
important concept. The learning to become "guṇaiḥ ". You know. Become observers
of our own thoughts. You know. Now, we, by default, observe the world around
us. We may not con..., con..., contemplate on what we observe. But we observe.
If we are sitting in a room. You know. If a door opens. And somebody come...,
Naturally, we see, who is coming in. The door opens, some..., somebody goes
over, see who went out. If, so, naturally, we observe this. So, just as we
observe the outer world around us, you know, the Bhagavad Gita is telling us
over here. Becau..., let, to observe the inner world. Now, what do we mean by
the inner world? We have discussed earlier, the inner world means that the
mental world. You know. You know. We, generally, people think inside us,
everything is spiritual. No. It, there, it, the inner, there is men..., there is
mental. And then, there is spiritual. So, you know, you know, you know, what is
spiritual is not necessarily, what..., whatever, whatever is internal is not
necessarily spiritual. You know. Whatever is internal may be, also be material.
And that is why, for, to understand the difference, you know, you know, you
know, you know, we have to become observers. So, that means, sometimes, at, when
our thoughts also come in. Lu..., lust comes in. When greed comes in. When anger
comes in. We have to recognise that these are not our thoughts. In the sense that
they are, they are within us. So, we can say they are mine. But no. Not
necessarily. You know. It is, it is not that, you know, everybody who i..., is
in our house is ours. 21:35
