Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=svwCox1DYfY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=svwCox1DYfY&redir_token=P4Xwd0YOAN4WlfkhGeNWRcH37bt8MTU0ODQ4OTg1MUAxNTQ4NDAzNDUx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_132_-_Bhagavad_Gita_16.07-16.10_-_The_errors_and_disasters_of_demoniac_modern_times_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the 16th Chapter. We discussed the, you know, divine qualities. And then,
we came to the point where we just started the demoniac qualities. So, Krishna
has until now described that divine qualities lead to liberation. And the
demoniac qualities lead to, you know, bondage. So, you know, now, we will,
li..., disc..., list the demoniac qualities. Let us start the discussion. 16.7
onwards, we will see.

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ
        na śaucaṁ nāpi cācāro
        na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate

So, "pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca". That, you know, acting properly. And acting
impropely. Prabhupada translates "pravṛttiṁ" and "nivṛttiṁ" simply. As "janā na
vidur āsurāḥ". So, the demoniac people "na vidur". They do not know. "na śaucaṁ
nāpi cācāro". And they do not have cleanliness. Nor do they have proper
behavior. "na cācāro". "na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate". And there is no truthfulness
among them, also. So, Krishna starts by describing, first and foremost, that,
you know, they, they, their behavior is not guided. Now, what guides their
behavior. Actually, normal, what, our behavior should be guided by scripture.
So, only when our behavior guided by scripture, then can, you know, we be acting
properly. Just as a sick patien..., as a specific, patient who is sick needs to
be guided by the doctor's, you know, guidelines. Similarly, they are all sick in
material existence. And scriptures are given to help us, you know, to help guide
us. So that we can reco..., re..., recover spiritually. And reclaim our eternal
spiritual happiness. And loving relationship with Krishna. So, you know,
"pravṛttiṁ". And "nivṛttiṁ". So, it is, so, scriptures tell us certain things to
do. And certain things to avoid. Certain prescriptions. And certain
proscription. So, "Do's and Don'ts". So, now, you know, you know, the demoniac
people do not care for them.

        viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva
        āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ

So, scriptures say that that the, you know, "viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva". Who are
the devatas? Those who are the devotees of Lord Vishnu. And those who are
opposite to that. That means those who are opposed Lord Vishnu, you know, they
are the demons. And what is the opposition to Lord Vishnu? You know. Vishnu is
not directly present in this world all the time. He co..., sometimes comes for
incarna..., as incarnatons. And those who oppose Him are demons. But, you know,
you know, those who oppose the, you know, you know, you know, words of Lord
Vishnu. They are also of a demoniac men..., mentality. Now, the, the, in the
previous verse, it was said, you know, "dvāv imau puruṣau loke". Sorry. No.

        dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin
        daiva āsura eva ca

So, both, you know, the..., these two verses, you know, you know, start with
"dvau". We discussed in 15.16 there are two kinds of "puruṣau"s. And, here, it
is, there, two kinds of living beings. So, both verses start with the same
theme. But there is a difference, you know, what is being talked about. There,
it has talked about fallible, infallible. Here, it is talking about, you know,
that is talking, conditioned, liberated. Here, it is talking about two people,
neither, the, even, not necessarily be liberated. Even the godly are not
necessarily liberated. Some of those be godly qualities may be liberated. But
many of them are not li..., you know, they are on the path to liberation.
Krishna has said, "daivī sampad vimokṣāya". "daivī sampad" will lead to
liberation. So, you know, when Krishna classifies this. There are divine. And
there are demoniac. So, what does it imply? Is it that everybody who is not
divine is demoniac? You know. So, when Prabhupada was asked this question.
Prabhupada was clear about the point. You know. The, we have to be careful when
we, what we mean by the word demoniac. We should not think demoniac means, you
know, some person who has two thorns coming out of the head. And maybe some, you
know, fangs coming out of the mouth. And hid..., a hideous-looking face. No.
That is the car..., you know, c..., stereotype, that is a caricature of a demon.
Demons do not necessarily have to be like that. You know. So, Jayadvaita
Maharaja wrote an article on betaji, where he said, you know, who is a demon?
So, he said that, actually, you know, your local politician might be a demon.
Your postman might be a demon. Your grocer might be a demon. Your neighbour
might be a demon. You might be a demon. So, what does it mean? It is more of a
mentality. Now, if we see in the Mahabharata, you know, it, the, the Ramayana,
is a war between the humans. And "rākṣasa"s. So, "Rāvaṇa" is a "rākṣasa". But
the Mahabharata is a war between humans, only. Kauravas and Pandavas are both
humans. And actually, "rākṣasa"s are there on both sides. So, you know, you
know, you know, "Bhīma"'s son, "Ghaṭotkaca", is born from "Hiḍimbī" who was a
Rakshasi. And therefore, he is a "rākṣasa". And, you know, on the opposite side,
there was a "rākṣasa", you know, called, named "Alambuṣā". So, he was a relative
of the "Bakāsura". Not the "Bakāsura" from the Krishna lila. But the "Bakāsura"
who was killed by "Bhīma". "Bakāsura" who had a voracious appetite. So, you
know, you know, and then, he was a relative, and then, he wanted to take
revenge. So, that is why he said to fight in this war against "Bhīma". So,
either way, there were "rākṣasa"s on both sides. You know. And there were humans
who were fighting the war. They were the, you know, prot..., main protagonists.
Main opponents were humans. But then, Duryodhana, although he may not have a
body like a "rākṣasa". That Duryodhana had a, you know, "āsurī" mentality. So,
there is a divine mentality. And there is, you know, demoniac mentality. Now,
within the demoniac mentality, also, there are people who are overtly demoniac.
And there are people who are under demoniac influence. So, had, many people are
godless today. Not because they deliberately, at least, from the slight
perspective, want to be godless. That is because they are living in a
sociocultural situation where they are not given knowledge about scripture. And
because, they, when they are not given knowledge about God. Then, they
naturally, you know, you know, do not come to know about Him. You know. Some
people may be "jignasu" who actually, you know, endeavor to know about God. But
many people do not. And that is how they stay in ignorance. And under the spell
of ignorance, they, you know, have to, you know, they often act be...,
godlessly. They act anti-scripturally. This happens sometimes, unfortunately.
So, this can be corrected. And that is what will be the theme of the, you know,
chapter at the end. That "chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ". Act according to "śāstram". But
here, Krishna is telling that the demoniac, the characteristic in general is
that they, their, they conduct is not in accordance to scripture.

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ

So, in today's society, people think that, you know, scripture is just some
old-fashioned, outdated, you know, you know, prescientific, you know, mythology.
Or just some more, you know, some imagine..., may, metaphor crea...,
metaphorically created for ima..., for morality or whatever. They do not
consider it as a, you know, you know, for what it is. Actually, the scriptures
are a manual for living. And when we do not use the manual, the, at best, we
underuse a gadget. At worst, we may, you know, we may misuse. And we may even
cause, you know, distraction of the gadget. Or we may cause distraction of
ourselves. You know. If somebody, you know, uses an electronic device. Maybe,
in an pro..., improper way, the device may have some co..., circutry which may
catch fire. Which may explode. Or whatever. So, you know, not necessarily
eletronic devices. Different kinds of devices. The point is that the manual
helps us to use it best. So, the scriptures are the manual. The demoniac:

        pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
        janā na vidur āsurāḥ

They do not follow scripture at all. And, you know, the, Prabhupada explains in
the purport that, you know, you know, you know, the, Prabhupada is, they are not
in cleanli..., in, Prabhupada is, usually, whenever talks about cleanliness, he
talks about, in terms of, cleanliness by chanting Hare Krishna. And then,
Prabhupada quotes "Manu-saṁhitā". 08:15
