Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AGXvJI3mCPE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=wa7gk1tcBnZpEQ9e6oXpqMRhl458MTU0ODQ4OTgwMUAxNTQ4NDAzNDAx&event=video_description&v=AGXvJI3mCPE&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_130_-_Bhagavad_Gita_15.15-15.20_-_How_the_tri-shloki_Gita_establishes_Krishna_as_the_Purushottama_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the 15th Chapter. Last part. We discussed, you know, the earlier sections
of the Bha..., you know, of the 15th Chapter. Let us have an overview of the
sections before we move to 15.15. So, you know, you know, the first section
talks about the upside-down banyan tree. And, you know, you know, conveys
through that metaphor how we can attain liberation through detachment. That is
verses 1 to 6. Then, 7 to 11 talks about how those who are not detached have to
undergo, you know, transmigration and stay in bondage. Then, the next, you know,
three ver..., next four verses, 12 to 15, you know, describe how Krishna assists
us in our material existence. And our spiritual endeavor. So, you know, you
know, we discussed how Krishna assists us in our material existence. Based on
how He helps us. You know. You know. You know. You know. You know.
Cosmologically. Terrestrially. Physiologically. Physiologically maintains the
body. So, now, let us move on and discuss about the spiritual aspect. So, how
Krishna helps all of us spiritually.

        sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo
        mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca
        vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
        vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

So, "sarvasya cāhaṁ". You know. "sarvasya". For all, in all living beings. "ca",
"aham". You know. You know. You know. You know. In all living beings' hearts.
"hṛdi sanniviṣṭo". I am situated, you know, "sanniviṣṭo". "anniviṣṭo" is the,
come, is related with the word "nivas". To reside. So, I reside. You know. You
know. You know. "mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca". And, you know, from Me come
three things, things. "smṛtir". "jñānam". "apohanaṁ". Remembrance. Knowledge.
And forgetfulness. We will discuss about these a little bit later more. But
"vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". You know. You know. You know. Just like 15.7
had two parts. You know. So, similarly, this verse also has two parts in the
sense that there are two distinct, you know, thoughts which are conveyed over
here. And then, they are linked, also. We will see how they are linked. So,
first is, Krishna's indwelling presence. And He, His actions through His
indwelling presence. You know. Second part is His connection with the Vedas.
That is "vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". That by all the Vedas, I am to be
known. And then, "vedānta-kṛd". That I am the compiler of "Vedānta". And
therefore, "veda-vid eva cāham". I know it. You know. It is not that, sometimes,
we may write something. We may speak anything. And then, somebody else comes and
says, ah, you spoke that point. It was so wonderful. Now, we may have spoken
that point. Or maybe a year, year ago. Two years. We forget the point, also. So,
Krishna is not like that. He is a "vedānta-kṛd veda-vid". He does not forget. He
remembers always whatever He has, you know, spoken in His, He does not, He is
not under illusion. So, He does not, He does not go on to forgetfulness. So,
"vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham". You know. You know. So, let us look at these
two units, you know, within this verse separately. And understand their, you
know, their significance. And then, their interconnection. So, first is Krishna
is present in the heart. That has been talked about earlier, also. You know. You
know. You know. You know. In 13.23 most prominently. You know.

	upadraṣṭānumantā ca
	bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ
	paramātmeti cāpy ukto
	dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ

So, "dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ". In the body, there is a transcendental per...,
person. "puruṣaḥ paraḥ". That is the Supreme Lord. You know. You know. So,
there, the focus was on "upadraṣṭānumantā ca". How this Lord is the overseer.
And the maintainer. But here, the focus is something different. Here, the focus
is on how He acts internally. So, if we, just three things. "mattaḥ". So, from
Me, come. The word "mattaḥ" is all living, li..., "mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate". In
10.8, Krishna has said that from Me. "mattaḥ" means from Me. From Me, the
universal order is, emanates. And is maintained. So, you know, you know, you
know, you know, "mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca". "smṛti...", you know, so,
remembrance. Knowledge. And forgetfulness. What does it mean? We see that,
actually, there are three aspects. There is knowledge. So, we will try to
understand this verse in different ways. First is that we get knowledge. Now,
Krishna acts internally as the "caitya-guru". In the, the indwelling Supersoul
is called as the "caitya-guru". You know. For the "cetanā", He is the guru from
inside. "caitya-guru". And we have, also have the, you know, you know, you know,
Siksha guru. Diksha guru. Externally. So, if the same Krishna, who is present
inside, guiding us as the indwelling Supersoul, is also present outside as the
Super..., as the guru. Sadhu. Shastra. So, from there, Krishna gives us
"jñānam". And when we get the "jñānam", after that, we have the choice. What do
we do with the "jñānam"? You know. You know. You know. If we decide to change
our desires according to the "jñānam" that we have got. So, for example, we get
the "jñānam". That I am not the body. I am the soul. And, you know, I am, you
know, meant to love and serve Krishna. And I will get grea..., far greater
happiness in that loving and serving Krishna. And not in..., independently
trying to enjoy. Separate rom Krishna. So, when I understand this. I got the
"jñānam". You know. Now, this "jñānam" is not just meant for pooling. Pooling
means, 'P', double 'O', L', 'I', 'N', 'G'. Pooling means just accumulating in
the head. Pool together. It is meant for pulling. It is meant to pull us towards
Krishna. This "jñānam" is meant to increase our attraction towards Krishna.
Increase our desire to surrender to Krishna. As it is mentioned in the
"Bhāgavatam", also.

        dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ
        viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ
        notpādayed yadi ratiṁ
        śrama eva hi kevalam

So, "dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ". That when one is situated in one's own, you
know, that whatever "dharmaḥ" one may do, the purpose is to increase our
attraction towards Krishna.

        viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ
        notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

If our attraction towards Krishna is not increasing, then "śrama eva hi
kevalam". It is actually a waste of time. So, now, after explaining this, the
next point that comes up is that, ok, so, now, I have the choice that I have
heard the knowledge. And based on the knowledge, I can change my desires. I can
try to, I am, try to, strive to turn towards Krishna. Now, if I de..., you know,
if I desire to turn towards Krishna. Then, one trajectory comes about. If I do
not desire to turn towards Krishna, then another comes about. So, when we say
Krishna gives kno..., re..., forgetfulness. So, what does it mean? You know.
Sometimes, we hear from scriptures, you know, sense gratification leads to
misery. But then, when the sense objects come in front of us, what happens?

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

What happens is we surrender to maya at that time. We just give up everything
else. And forget about everything. That is what actually, we say, happened to
"Ajamila". Isn't it? He just forgot all dharma. You know. Forgot his dharma as a
son. Forgot his dharma as a brahmin. Forgot as a dharma, as a member of
a respectable soc..., of a respected society. And just, as, you know, just
cap..., capitulated to the attraction to the, you know, prositute. So, now, when
this sci..., kind of thing happens, you know, "mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja". So,
Krishna is telling us, surrender to Me. But, you know, you know, we can have
other desires. So, what happens is, when maya tempts us, at that time, often, we
just tend to forget every...., you know, all the instructions that we have heard
from guru. Sadhu. Shastra. And we succumb to the temptation. So, now, can we say
that, oh, Krishna gives forgetfulness. Therefore, Krishna is responsible.
Krishna is responsible. Why? Because Krishna caused the forgetful..., Krishna
i..., Krishna gives forgetfulness. So, now, I forgot. So, what can I do? So, if
students go for an exam. And then, sometimes, student get a blackout. You know.
Just forget something. All they have memorised, just at the time of the exam,
they forget. So, then, can they say, oh, I studied. But Krishna is to take the
blame. Because Krishna gives forgetfulness. No. We have to understand that
Krishna is responsive. We are responsible. Krishna is responsive. He responds.
Responds to what? You know. Our desires. So, the, there is responsive. And
responsible. Responsible means it is related with the response. Able. You know.
We are able to choose our response. And we are meant to choose the right
response. Responsible. So, we are meant to be responsible. Krishna will be
responsive. That means, you know, you know, when temptations come. And we forget
all the instructions that we have heard from scripture. You know. So, actually,
why is that happening? If we go back to 2.62 and 63 in the Bhagavad Gita, then,
you know, we see that:

        dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ

Krishna describes that it all begins with contemplation. And then, He gives a
whole sequence in which, for, we let the consciousness degenerate. It, degrade
along that sequence. Contemplation. Then, attachment. Then, ob..., obsession.
Then, you know, you know, you know, that, the, so, the first, there is, you
know, "dhyāyato". Then, there is "saṅgāt". That is attachment. Then, there is
"kāmaḥ". That is infatuation. Then, there is, you know, you know, "krodhaḥ".
There is, you know, anger. Then, there is, you know, "sammohaḥ". Delusion. And
then, "sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ". So, "smṛti-vibhramaḥ". That forgetfulness
comes after "sammohaḥ". That means we, when the temptations come, when the
material desires come, it is we who contemplate. You know. That is nice. You
know. I would like to have that. And we entertain the desires. And when Krishna
sees that we are entertaining the desires, we are telling Krishna, yeah, I have
heard all the things that You have taught me. But I do not care about it. I want
to enjoy. Then, Krishna says, ok. If that is what you want to do, if that is
what want, you want to, just enjoy separate from Me. You want to, you know, you
know, to continue to struggle to get that tiny little pleasure that is there in
the material world. That is what you want, I will all..., let you do that. So,
Krishna gives us forgetfulness because we want to act in forgetfulness of that
reality. So, we may say no, no, no. Actually, I want to remember. I want to act
according to Krishna's instructions. Yes. We want to. But then, you know, you
know, when the temptations come, what is our response? We often entertain the
desires. Entertain means, we allow them to entertain. Enter. And then, we do not
dismiss the desires. We actually retain the desires. So, they enter. And retain.
So, that is entertain. So, we entertain the desires. And when we entertain the
desires, what happens? They start taking more and more space. You know. First
they have a, we give them a foothold. And then, they will build a stronghold
over there. You know. They get a full hold our consciousness, ultimately. And
then, what happens is, you know, "apahṛta-cetasām". Our consciousness gets
abducted away. So, therefore, we cannot, you know, blame Krishna for
forgetfulness. Krishna is rec..., is reciprocal. He is responsive. You know. So,
you know, so what happens is, for us, when the tempta..., our temptations come,
it is important for us. So, Krishna has given us "jñānam" from guru. Sadhu.
Shastra. And then, depending on what is the desire that we choose to have. If we
choose to have the desire, you know, i..., if we hold on to the desire to love
and serve Him, you know, you know, then what will happen? Krishna will give us
further stronger remembrance of scripture. Of guru. Sadh..., the message of
guru. Sadhu. Shastra. And over a period of time, Krishna will give us
forgetfulness of material desires. And material enjoyment. And then, we will not
feel that, oh, I am missing something. I have to renounce something. No. We will
feel that, actually, those who are chasing after that, they are unfortunate.
That is what is the, you know, position of Prahlada Maharaja. Prahlada Maharaja
is, you know, you know, in his prayers, famous prayer, he says that:

        naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās
        tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ
        śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-
        māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān

So, he says that my dear Lord, I have no anxiety about how I will cross beyond
material existence. Wh..., why? Because "tvad-vīrya-gāyana". In glorifying You,
"mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ". I have got immense nectar. And as I get this nectar,
"mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ". So, what happens? "śoce tato vimukha-cetasa". You know.
I lament for those. "śoce". For whom? "vimukha-cetasa". Those whose
consciousness has turned away. "vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-". For the sake of
sense gratification, those who have turned their consciousness away from
Krishna. You know. "tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-". And then, what happens?
"māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān". "māyā-sukhāya bharam". That, you know,
one, you know, you know, "māyā-sukhāya". That actually, you know, for the sake
of illusory happiness, "bharam udvahato". Big burden. The "vimūḍhān"s. The
foolish people are carrying. Actually, the word "vimūḍhān" means not just fool.
Special fool. What is the special fool? They are empowered fools. You know. We
talk about empowered devotees. But there can be empowered fools, also. What does
the empowered fool means? Means they have a lot of power for doing foolish
activities. So, their desi..., our desires will empower us. Now, if our desires
are positive. The empowerment will be positive. If the desires are distractive.
Then, the empowerment will be distractive. So, you know, you know, you know, as
just Prahlada Maharaja is praying that my dear Lord, I, I, I have, pity those
who are chasing after sense gratification. You know. A tiny pleasure. Which is a
big burden of anxiety. And, you know, lamentation. Hankering. And lamentation.
So, what does this mean? F..., you know, coming back to our Bhagavad Gita verse.
That means when m..., he, when he sees people enjoying sense gratification. You
know. He has heard from guru. Sadhu. Shastra. Narada Muni. And others. That
actually, this is, there is no real pleasure over here. It simply leads to
suffering. So, what is he saying now? He is saying that, he, he is not even
considering enjoying the sense objects. Enjoying sense gratification. So, what
happens? Because he has strongly chosen to desire to serve Krishna. So, then,
Krishna is giving him more and more remembrance. More and more remembrance of
what? His own beauty. His own sweetness. His own glory. His own means Krishna's.
And then, what happens by that? "mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ". Becomes completely
absorbed in remembrance of Krishna. So, when one is thus
"mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ", then what happens? Then, you know, when one forgets
material su..., the, forgets material enjoyment. That means the tiny little
enjoyment is there. One does not even crave for it. One thinks that, actually,
for that little enjoyment, so much hankering. So much lamentation. You know. We
discussed how sense enjoyment is like a sandwich. You know. It is a two thick
loaves of bitter bread of, you know, faun..., tasting. And f..., actually, and
then, in-between, there is a little thin, you know, delicious stuff. So, that,
the two thick loaves are hankering. First, hankering. When will I get it? When
will I get it? When will I get it? When will I get it? You know. You know. And
then, finally, I get it. And then, after that, oh, I lost it. I lost it. I lost
it. Lost it. Why did I, why did it get over so quickly? Why did it get over?
That is lamentation. So, like that, one feels that w.., so, one does not
remember the pleasure in sense gratification. One remembers all the associated
misery that comes with sense gratification. And one feels, I, I, it is nothing
in it. So, Krishna can invert the normal dynamics for a serious devotee. What do
we mean by normal dynamics? The normal dynamics for, you know, for the
struggling sadhaka is that when sense objects come in front. That the, you know,
the person forgets, you know, Krishna. And instructions from guru. Sadhu.
Shastra. And then, remembers maya. So, now, Krishna is giving the forgetfulness
and remembrance because that is what the soul is desiring. But if a soul
seriously desires to love and serve Krishna, then Krishna will invert this. And
then, Krishna will give forgetfulness of sense enjoyment. And Krishna will give
remembrance of His own sweetness. His own glory. His own beauty. And then, the
struggle will become, and struggle in trying to control the senses. In trying to
move away from sense gratification towards Krishna will become much, much lesser
for us. So, Krishna is responsive. We are responsible. That means when desires
come, we have to choose what will we do. We should not become a desirer of
desires. "kāma-kāmī". We need to become a desirer of Krishna. And then, when we
do that, you know, then gradually, this will change. You know. So, Krishna, you
know, acts for our welfare. Now, even when Krishna gives us forgetfulness. Why
does He do that? That is also to facilitate our eventual return to Him. How is
that? You know. When Krishna gives forgetfulness, also, He does not condemn, you
know, a person to perennial forgetfulness. No. It is forgetfulness. And then,
the, in the, in the intoxication that results after forgetfulness. The
intoxication, the infatuation with the hope for material enjoyment. Then, the
jna..., that, then it, were sof..., softer, phases out. Because when one enjoys,
one realises there is anticlimax. There is nothing in it. So, then, one
afterwards comes back to Krishna. And Krishna then gives guidance for the person
to come back to Him. So, you know, you know, you know, what we are, seekers
should do is we should try to move closer and closer towards Krishna. That means
when we have the opportunity to remember Krishna, at that time, you know,
ser..., we seriously remember Krishna. So, that means when we are in the
association of devotees. We are studying scriptures. We are, you know, chanting
the holy names. We are in a devotional environment. That time, it is relatively
easier to remember Krishna. So, so, when it is possible for us to remember
Krishna, if at that time, we show Krishna our earnestness. Yes. I want to
remember You, Krishna. Then, Krishna sees that. And then, afterwards, when the
temptations come, Krishna will give us the knowledge. No. Krishna will give us
the remembrance. No. Do not, no need to get involved. Do not get into this. You
know. You know. And if we respond to that, we will be protected. You know. You
know. So, we begin by doing what we can do. You know. To end our forgetfulness,
we need to first end our forgetfulness of our forgetfulness. What does that
mean? To end our forgetfulness, we need to first end our forgetfulness of our
forgetfulness. You know. Sometimes, we become forgetful. And we are, forg..., we
forget that we have forgotten, also. That means, we get so much into illusion
that we do not even realise that we are in illusion. But if we are in illusion.
Suppose we are chanting. And we get spaced out. You know. While chanting, we
start, you know, doing some sightseeing. You know. Looking at the sky. Looking
here. Looking there. And if we are all alone, then we will be forgetful. And we
will stay forgetful, all, for, forgetfulness, also. But if we are staying, in
the association of devotees. You know. Somebody will come, Prabhu, what are you
doing? Oh. You know. I am meant to chant. It is chanting time. Let me chant.
So, then, what will happen is, we have to resolve to end our forgetfulness of
our forgetfulness. That means as soon as we become aware, oh, I have forgotten,
then we bring ourselves back on track. You know. So, by that, also, we show
Krishna that we want to come towards Him. As we have discussed earlier, you
know, a plane is often off-track. When a plane is moving, say, Mum..., from
Mumbai to Kolkata. At that time, you know, it is not that a plane moves in a
straight line. Almost for 90% of the time, you know, because of the atmospheric
conditions. Because of the wind. And because of pressure, the plane keeps going
off-track. When the plane go..., keeps going off-track for 90% of the time, how
does it reach the destination? Because the pilot brings it back on track. It
goes off-track. Again on track. Off-track. On track. Off-track. On track. And
then, gradually, because the pilot is focused on the destination, so,
eventually, the plane be, is, stays, reaches the destination. Inspite of the
distractions.

So, like that, our, we will get distracted. We will not be able to avoid that.
So, we may become forgetful. But we should resolve to end our forgetfulness of
our forgetfulness. You know. As soon as we remember, oh, this is, I am going the
wrong track. Bring, bring back. Bring back. Bring back. And by this, we will
keep moving forwards. At, eventually, until we reach the final destination.
Until we develop love for Krishna. So, here, we know that Krishna is ready to
help us. And we will also observe in our spiritual life that certain forms of
enjoyment which we used to crave for earlier, they become utterly insignificant
over a period of time. That means that over a, over a period of, say, you know,
steady practice. We may, say, we may have been infatuated with a particular
thing in the past. We may have been infatuated parti..., particular sport. Or a
particular food item. Say, some, some of it might have been very ada...,
attached to meat-eating. You know. You know. But then, you know, after we get
the higher taste of prasad, then what happens? Then, you know, do we feel any
attraction for meat? No. Not at all. What has happened? You know. Krishna has
given us forgetfulness of that taste of the meat. So, what might have, you know,
immediately caused saliva, or secrete and, you know, act, agitate, craving to be
generated in our mind earlier. Now, nothing happens. So, Krishna can give us
forgetfulness of our, you know, of the, of, or even our cherished material
enjoyments. You know. So, just as, it has, it can, it has happened for a few of
our cherished material enjoyments, it will happen for the remaining, also. We
just have to keep persevering. In our practice of devotional practice. When we
keep persevering steadily in the practice of our devotional service, eventually,
we come to a level where we become, you know, liberated from, you know, even
our, the, even the strongest of material enjoyments. The strongest of material
enjoyments, we will become liberated from them. And then, we can purely relish
the nectar of Krishna Consciousness. Of remembrance of Krishna. Love of Krishna.
So, this is the first part of this verse. You know. Krishna gives us, you know,
re..., knowledge through guru. Sadhu. Shastra. And then, depending on whether
what, what our, does the desire that we cultivate, He will either give us
remembrance or He will give forgetfulness. Now, second part is, says that
"vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo". Now, we wonder, where the "sarv...", why
do the "Vedas" come in suddenly? Yes. Because the "jñānam". So, Krishna is
talking now about, first, He has talked about His internal role is, you know,
that "smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca". So, how does He give the "jñānam"? He gives
the "jñānam" externally through the "Vedas". So, then, He is telling what is the
connection with the "Vedas". He says, actually, by all the "Vedas", I am to be
known. You know. You know. Now, in the "Vedas", there are large variety of
subjects is talked about. Most of the "Vedas", if we use the word "Ved...", you
know, "Vedas" in a restrictive sense to refer to, you know, you know, the four
"Vedas", only. You know. Then, 24:01
