# vedic-studies
Vedic Studies

I have found the following motivations behind this project:

* Eliminate accent to make it easier for some people to grasp.

* The facilitator may also speak too fast or to slow to be understood. While one
speed up or slow down videos, it may not be the best solution as the voice will
be distored. So, it can actually make the hearing and understanding worse.

* Make finding reference easier by simple text search rather than playing video
back and forth.

* Sometimes, the video and the audio are out of sync. This is not the best
experience, and the text will not have this issue.

* At least some people can read faster than watching videos.

* Sometimes, the grammar is not correct in the video and this can be fixed in
the text. It is difficult to fix the video due to the technology that it was
created with several years ago.

* Rarely, there are factual mistakes in the class, which can be easily corrected
in text form, but again, not so much in the videos and technology that was used
for creating them. This needs to be done carefully and probably with
authorisation.

* Rarely, the slides haves typos on them.

* Our ears can simply be used for other things, if need to, while reading these
notes.

* Internet connection is not always available or someone may just wish to store
this knowledge on disk. In this case, text will consume less space on the hard
disk than videos.

Having said that, all credit goes to Chaitanya Charan Prabhuji's classes. They
are extremely valuable asset in the Vedic fold, especially those studying for
Bhakti Shastri.

It has taken me about one hour to transcribe ten minutes manually. So, it is
about 1200 hours to transcribe the Bhakti Shastri modules. It is a lot of work.
If you know any good software that could aid this process, that would be great
to hear. I have tried Google Voice and some other solutions to no avail. They
produced poor output where I ended deleting nearly all what they have generated.
So, I have decided to do these manually until someone can offer me a better
solution.
