Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0sZQl0gZf1A
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=0sZQl0gZf1A&redir_token=3R90jYETaYWCeWcMtJa5XvT0rPx8MTU0MTgzMDc4NkAxNTQxNzQ0Mzg2&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_037_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_7_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction, as a part of our Bhakti Sastri.

Today, we will be discussing one of the most important verses of the Nectar of
Instruction. Now, we are entering deep into the heart of sadhana. Now, we talked
about association in the previous three verses, recognition, texts. And now, we
are moving forward to discuss what do we do in association? So, one of the most
important activities that we do is chant the holy names. And this verse is
fundamental. It is most, single most important verse that can sustain us in the
process of sadhana bhakti if we just understand its essence and internalise it.
So, let us look at this text. So, this is text seven of the Upadesamrta.

        syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy avidyā-
        pittopatapta-rasanasya na rocikā nu
        kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā
        svādvī kramād bhavati tad-gada-mūla-hantrī

So, "syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi", so "kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi", everything
connected with Krishna, his name, his character, his pastimes, "ādi" means
his pastimes, and other things related with him. "sitā", "sitā" actually refers
to sweetness, sugar candy, Prabhupada translated. "āpy avidyā-", "avidyā-pitto",
so there is an implied comparison here. When there is an explicit comparison, he
was, he was as powerful as a lion. That is called a simile. When there is direct
comparison, his roar was lionine. That means lionine is like a lion. So, he,
that means there is a not implied compa..., there is an implied comparison,
not a stated comparison. So, here, there is implied comparison, that is called a
metaphor. So, "avidyā-" is compared to a "pitto", and "pi...", "pitto", when a
"tapta", "pittopatapta", when the person is afflicted by "pitto", "rasanasya na
rocikā nu", "rasana" is tongue, "na rocikā nu", when the tongue is afflicted by
"pitto", at that time, the, the bi..., because of that bile infection, he has
been referred to joints disease over here, then the person cannot taste anything
sweet.

"na rocikā nu", that which is "sitā", that which is sweet, cannot be tested,
tasted, relished, because of "pittopatapta". But the treatment in, according to
ayurveda, for joint disease "kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā", if
somehow, "anudinaṁ", daily, regularly one keeps taking "ādarād", respectfully,
"juṣṭā", one keeps accepting it, then "svādvī kramād bhavati", then gradually
the sugar kane juice, which is sweet, it actually acts as a therapy, a cure for
the si..., si..., sickness. Then as a person gets cured, then the person awakens
the natural taste. And, "tad-gada-mūla-hantrī", the disease is destroyed from
the root. So, the point is that, the same thing which does not taste good, if we
keep taking it, it can cure us, and it will start tasting good. So:

"The holy name, character, pastimes and activities of Krishna are all transcendentally
sweet like sugar candy. Although the tongue of one afflicted by the jaundice of
avidya [ignorance] cannot taste anything sweet, it is wonderful that simply by
carefully chanting these sweet names every day, a natural relish awakens within
his tongue, and his disease is gradually destroyed at the root."

So, the disease is destroyed at the root. Let us see how this happens. Let us
look at Srila Prabhupada's purport here. So, here, there is a chart because of
the overview of the purport. So, the symptoms of disease are that there is no
taste for the name form. And the analogy that is given is for sugar candy,
jaundice. So, ev..., every disease has its particular symptom. And from the
symptom, you have to go back to the cause. So somebody can say, oh, I do not
find Krishna Consciousness relishable. I do not care for it. So, just, that is a
problem definitely. But the deeper problem is a misdirection of our heart. It is
avidya. So, avidya is not just ignorance in terms of philosophical ignorance. It
is ignorance in terms of ignorance about the right object of love. Now, what
happens? What is the cause of this disease? That is described in the next
section. That is individual. That, the, there is ignorance, avidya. And avidya,
what it leads to? Forgetfulness. And what is the forgetfulness that is being
talked about here? The forgetfulness is that:

        jivera svarupa hoy krsnera nitya das

and

        krishna bhuliya jiva bhoga vancha kare
        nikata aste maya taare jhapatiya dhare

So, these verses from the Caitanya Caritamrta are very important. Let us look at
them. First is, "jivera svarupa hoy krsnera nitya das", you know in this one
verse, the whole import of all the vedic wisdom is summarised by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in one concise sutra like verse. "jivera svarupa hoy krsnera nitya
das". Eternal svarupa of the jiva is to serve the Lord. And it is with this
service attitude that the living entity thrives eternally. The Lord, so, this is
the eternal relationship which we have. Now, when we forget it:

        krishna bhuliya jiva bhoga vancha kare
        nikata aste maya taare jhapatiya dhare

So, how did the soul, who is in the eternal position of loving and serving
Krishna, how does the soul lose that position? That is "krishna bhuliya", if the
soul forgets Krishna. We can apply this in our sadhaka stage also. We are
practicing Krishna Consciousness, but if we are not careful, we forget Krishna.
"krishna bhuliya jiva", and then what happens? "bhoga vancha kare", we all have
the need for happiness. None of us can live without happiness. So, if we do not
get happiness in remembering and serving Krishna, naturally, our hunger for
happiness will need to be fulfilled somewhere else. So, therefore, "bhoga vancha
kare", therefore, the desire to enjoy comes up. And this "bhoga vancha kare",
what does it lead to do? It leads to do "nikata aste maya taare". So, now, I, I
want, I have the desire to enjoy, but some, maya is right next. That means
temptations are right there in our heart, and outside our heart. You know, in
our heart means, that all the past things that we have done wrong, they are
those impressions are there. They are pushing us. And outside the heart means,
around the world, there are so many temptations, and so "jhapatiya dhare", that
maya is situated very close by, "jhapatiya dhare", just catches the soul.

And then, once the soul gets caught in maya, at that time, those impressions
become stronger because of the indulgence, and then the grip of those impression
in future becomes even stronger. And then it is, becomes very difficult to
be released. So, this is how our disease increases. So, once the disease is
increased, soul is distracted by maya. "nikata aste maya taare jhapatiya dhare",
so when the maya catches the living entity, started with maya, then false or bad
shelter. 07:36
