Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3RQ0hSFPk6Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_027_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_2_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=3RQ0hSFPk6Q&redir_token=H81_nWI_D043fSvTtdercSO7g1V8MTU0MDY1ODczOEAxNTQwNTcyMzM4&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Nectar of Instruction course. We are discussing currently
mantra two, text two here. So we discussed the first two parts of this verse,
atyahara and prayasa. Now, we will describe, discuss the remaining parts. So
here we have the slide, which was, now, we are going to discuss prajalpa,
niyamagrahah, jana-sangah, and laulyam.

So, prajalpa. Prajalpa. Jalpa means talk. Prajalpa means useless talk. Prajalpa.
So, the point is not that we have to become silent, but we have to know how, what is
the most productive talk for us as spiritualists.

So, we may wonder what is the relationship between the first part and the second
part. That means the first verse talked about certain aspects which a person has
to give up. And now this verse is talking about some other aspects which ... (?,
01:08) can harm us also spiritually. So is there a relationship? In one sense,
"vacho vega" may seem very similiar to prajalpa. And here, Prabhupada also used
the example of a frog, which also seems similar.

So, essentially, they may be similar, but the frame of analysis is different.
The first is talking from the perspective of the body. The body, the mind, the
urges, which, the va..., which can harm a person on the spiritual path. But the
focus there is on the bodily urges. Here, the focus is more from the spiritual
perspective.

Now, if we look at the previous verse, my verse, essentially controlling those
vegas is important for all transcendentalists. It is a generic description that
is given. Whereas, here it is described, it is from a devotional perspective,
that these six activities will harm the bhakti-lata-bija.

        sadbhir bhaktir vinasyati

So of course there can be coincidences, that certain things which can be
materially harmful, and spiritually harmful also. For example, intoxication. You
know, it is spiritually detrimental. It is materially also detrimental. Or we
can have also nowadays eating non-vegetarian food, is being increasingly
recognised to be materially also unhealthy, and it is spiritually, it is
extremely undesirable. So there can be co..., overlaps. But then the
perspectives are different.

From the material perspective, some people may say certain things are good, but
from the spiritual perspective, they may not necessarily be good. So the point
here is that there can be overlap, but the focus in both the analyses is
different. That here the focus is on the bhakti, what is anikul to bhakti, and
what is pratikul to bhakti. So let us look at prajalpa. So I said, jalpa means
speech. Prajalpa means actually speech that is harmful, that is detrimental. So,
it is similar to "vacho vega".

Now, it is interesting that Vishvapitamaha in his instructions talks about
speech to Yudishtira. That is one of the longest sections in the whole
Mahabharata. Just like there are eighteen chapters in the Bhagavad Gita,
similarly there are eighteen Parvas in the Mahabharata. And the longest among
the Parvas, there is the, there is Bhishma Parva which at the start of the,
start of the war takes places, where long description is there. Similarly the
long conversation that we see, one long conversation is the conversation between
Dharma and Yudishtira, very long conversation.

Similarly the long conversation between Yudistir and Bhishma. So there, when
Bhishma is instruction, instructing Yudishtira in raja dharma, he explains that
how should a person speak. And he gives a hierarchy. So he says, this is an
adaptation of what he is speaking for our analysis. So he says that the best
speech is about the Lord, the glorification of the Lord. Then, he says is
pleasing speech. The he says is truthful speech. Then below that he says is
useless speech. And then is blasphemous speech.

So, there is five ways of analysing. Like that there can be different ways, but
here, speak about the Absolute Truth, speech, sweet speech, truthful speech,
useless speech, and blasphemous speech.

So, anything that is blasphemous, anything that is useless, that will all come
under prajalpa. Now, it is interesting that he places sweet speech above
truthful speech. Now, Krishna also when he is describing in the Bhagavad Gita,
in the seventeenth chapter, he talks about austerity of speech. And there He
says:

        anudvega-karam vakyam
        satyam priya-hitam ca yat
        svadhyayabhyasanam caiva
        van-mayam tapa ucyate

So He describes "anudvega-karam vakyam", "anudvega-karam", that "vakya" which
does not agitate others. "satyam priya-hitam ca yat", that is which is truthful,
that is which is pleasing, that is beneficial. And then "svadhyayabhyasanam
caiva", reciting of the Vedic scriptures, all these are "van-mayam tapa ucyate",
they are austerities of the speech. That this means that all these are
austerities by which one can spiritualise one's speaking power.

By doing these activities, our speaking power will not get dissipated, but we
will have the opportunity to uti.., utilise it more and more for Krishna's sake.
So, in general, those speeches which are detrimental to our spiritual life,
those we should avoid. Now what are the speeches that are detrimental?
So, certainly, blasphemous speech is detrimental. So, we discussed earlier what
"vacho vegam", where people want to talk about all sorts of, hundreds of, there
are so many channels. There are so many chat rooms. There are so many messaging
systems and there is so much unproductive talk that is happening.

But in this context, because we focus on bhakti, we will talk something more
specific here. We will talk about how devotees can engage in talks that can be
detrimental to one's bhakti. So these can be of two gra..., broad categories.

One is those which are blasphemous, and those which are rumor based. See,
blasphemous means that there is, we are speaking bad about devotees and the
whole purpose is to malign the devotee by that. Now, the important point is not
that whether it is true or false. The, if the intention is to malign the
devotee, that can be offensive to our spiritual life. It can be injurious, very
very injurious. So, it is the mad elephant offense coming. And it can destroy
our bhakti-lata-bija.

So, there is, beyond that, rumor based speak, speech. Rumor based speech means
we hear. Say, as devotees, we have certain moral standards all of us are
expected to follow. And anybody can have difficulties in following those moral
standards. Now, when somebody has some difficulties and somebody falls at that
time, then they need our help. At the very least, we can offer a prayers. If you
can offer any practical help to them, we need, they need help from us.

Now, imagine if a warrior is going on a war field, and that wa..., warrior gets
wounded. And when that person is wounded, the person should be sent to the
hospital. But imagine if a warrior is wounded, and because of that, the person
swa..., because of getting wounded in the war, the warrior is sent to a jail.

What happens? Now, if we send to the jail, those who need the hospital, are we
being compassionate? Actually, we are being violent in a way. So, all devotees,
no matter who externally in a position advanced they may be, they all have their
challenges in the practice of spiritual life. And if somebody has some
difficulties. Somebody has some slips, some falls, then they need a hospital.
There are a very few devotees who actually come with the intention to be
hypocritical.

Generally, while Srila Prabhupada's mercy, we have such high standards, that if
a person just wants to enjoy, then the material world offers better prospects for
enjoyment than the disciplines of Krishna Consciousness and subsequent
enjoyment, that a person may get, after following those disciplines.

So, there are people who are sincere, who try to practice, but for whatever
reasons, they fall. Now, when they fall, if we can help, that is well and good.
If we cannot help them, then best is not to talk about it. Because what are we
doing by it? Are we maki..., are we going to make any spiritual advancement by
talking about the fall of some devotee? No, we are not going to make any. Only,
if it is generally in the mood, in a way of trying to learn what was wrong in
it. Then, maybe something can be learnt.

But even then, especially when an event has happened, then after that the
emotional impact of the event is far greater than the rational analysis. And so,
we cannot learn much if some devotee had that some problem. Ok, at lea..., at
the very least, we should not be a part of the rumor mongering group that goes
around talking about those things. If somebody has that problem, yes, now it is
between that person and Krishna, that person and the authority over there who is
aware of this.

Now, I have not come to Krishna Consciousness movement to gossip about people.
So, we have to understand that there will be many devotees, unfortunately, who
succumb to this tendency of gossipping. You know, this person, this happened,
andd you know, that person, that happened, that person, that happened. Now, it
may have happened. And now, actually, technology has made the, has given this
gossip an international reach and flavor. You know, one person can write
something. And one person posts a mail. And it goes to thousands of people all
over the world. And most of these people have no way to confirm.

So, generally, if we hear something negative about someone, that just sticks in
the mind. That may stay for a long time in our mind. So, this simply contaminates
our consciousness and others' consciousness. So we have come to Krishna
Consciousness movement for a purpose. And that purpose is to become Krishna
conscious. So, once we keep that goal in mind, then it becomes very clear what
we should talk with other devotees.

You know, we should not assume that senior devotees are perfect. Even if they
fall, or when they talk about other devotees who fall. Now, even seniors may,
our seniors may succumb to this. If that is happening, then we sho..., we
should, we should, at that time, move away from there.

So now sometimes, for an educational purpose, or for a protection purpose, some
authorities may speak about somebody. That is different. That is the situation
when a person is authorised and that time also, how one should speak is, in a
way, that does not make it difficult for that devotee to become integrated, to
continue in devotional service.

There was a disciple of Srila Prabhupada, who, he was a sannyasi, a dynamic
leader. But somehow, he had some difficulties. He fell. And then he felt that
now I have fallen from the standards, so he gave up his sannyasi. And his
sannyasis danda, he sent by courier back to Srila Prabhupada. And then,
Prabhupada's servant was over there who received, who received Prabhupada's
letters. And when he saw, he read the letter, and he saw that. And he has spread
the news among everyone, you know what happened to this person, what happened to
this person, what happened to this person.

And then, this just spread in the whole devotee community, and when Prabhupada
came to know about it, Prabhupada was more angry with the devotee who spread the
news about the other devotee's problems than the devotee who had the probems.
Prabhupada told him, now you have made almost impossible for him to come back to
the association of devotees.

Now, we may say that, oh no, if that person has fallen, why should that person
have false ego. He can come in. Be humble. No, there is the concept of false ego
is one thing. But all of us are human beings. And there has to be some basic
human sensitivity. You know, what are the human needs of a person, we should not
snap them by calling them as egoistic needs. No, everybody needs, in a
community, everybody needs a basic level of respect.

If our dirty linen, if the dirty things in our house are displayed for the whole
world to see, we feel bad. So, now, this is not to say that we, we sweep all the
problems that anybody has under the carpet, and we pretend that everything is
nice. That is not the point. You know, if somebody has problem, we have
standards to follow. Those who cannot follow the standards. They have to make
some changes, whatever the changes may be.

But the point is that just by talking about these things to others, we do not
help anyone. We do not need ourselves. We do not help others. When we even hurt
those people who are having those problems. So this is a very common form of
prajalpa that is becoming more and more increasing.

And now with the internet available, and there are many devotees who have
grievances with their local authorities, with the ISKCON, with the ISKCON GBC,
or whatever. And then, they went out with their grievances is by opening
websites, and sending emails, in which they tell people that this is wrong, that
is wrong, that is wrong, and this person did this, and that person did that.

One thing we have to understand that, you know, I came to Krishna conscious
movement to become Krishna conscious. And I have seen in my life that if I
practice Krishna consciousness, I do become purified. If I chant Hare Krishna,
if I associate with devotees, then my lust decreases, my greed decreases, my
anger decreases, my attraction to Krishna increases.

So if we practice the process of Krishna Consciousness at even a basic level of
sincerity and diligence, we will see that this process works. So if the process
is working for me, then let it work, and let me help it work for others also. If
some people have some difficulties, yes, it is between them and Krishna. They
will deal with it. Just talking about the problems of devotees does not really
lead to any good towards anyone.

Now, of course, there are two different issues here. Both of them have to be
balanced. One is that we want to have proper standards and those who cannot
stick to the standards, you know, we cannot let them compromise the standards.
But at the same time, we also want to be compassionate. And we want to encourage
everyone in the practice of devotional service.

So those who are leaders, it is their responsibility that if somebody has a
problem, how to deal with that problem in a way that is sensitive. At the same
time, that is also faithful to the tradition and sympathetic to the person. This
is a balance which is not easy to achieve. But certainly, talking behind the
back about what happened to anyone, there is... There are a few things which
hurt the whole community's spiritual atmosphere as much as this.

So, the Krishna conscious movement is very big. And because there are different
people from different parts of the world, who have come, with the different
conditionings, something will be always happening somewhere in the movement. So,
you know, we have come here to become conscious of Krishna. We have not come
here to become conscious of the false of different people in different parts of
the world.

You know, if we, see, ultimately, Krishna is like a kalpataru. Kalpataru means
desire tree. What we want from Krishna, we will get from Krishna. And to a large
extent, that applies to ISKCON also. That when we come to ISKCON, what we want,
we will get from ISKCON. Now, if I come to ISKCON, to become proud, then I can
get so much of my pride from, you know, in which organisation you go, and as
soon as you enter, people offer obeisances to you. You know, I just have to stay
around for a few years, five years, ten years, fifteen years, and what happens?
I become a senior devotee. People start offering obeisances to me. So, if I want
to be become proud, if I want, if I want pride, I can get more pride than at
other places.

If I want power, you know, the way devotees submit to their authorities, you
know, even in companies, bosses, subordinates may not submit like that at times.
So I may get that also.

If I want wealth, Krishna can give that to me. You know, if I get into
fundraising, Krishna can import me, and I will have so much in my hands. I am
meant to use it for Krishna's service, but I can misappropriate it if I want.
But I come for wealth, I get wealth.

So just as somebody can get respect, somebody can get power, somebody can get
wealth. You know, if I want controversy, I will get more controversy in ISKCON
than in the material world also, the rest of the material world. So if my kalpa
is controversy, then ISKCON will be my controversy kalpataru. If my desire is
controversy, Krishna, ISKCON is going to give me so many controversies. You
know, this happened here. That happened there. There that happened, and
then I will be in the Krishna consciousness movement, but I will be controversy
concious, not Krishna conscious. And I will be defeating the purpose for which I
came here.

So therefore, prajalpa means that when we talk about things that are not anukul
for our bhakti, that do not nourish our bhakta-lata-bija, then they, now we are
talking not about material subject matters, we discussed earlier about how
whatever material subject matters are required for our functioning in life and
in the broader society, we have to discuss them. We do not get too much caught
into them, but we discuss them at a basic level.

Now, we are talking about within devotee community. When we come, there is so
much Krishna katha that we can discuss. Now, we hear classes, we read books, and we
can discuss what we have heard or read, and we can inqui..., deepen our mutual
understanding. And we can discuss about services and how we can improve our
services. So that way, we do not have to talk about all these things.

And generally, if we have to talk for some reason or the other, then it is best
to be very prayerful and very cautious. That means, if some devotee has had
some problems, and we, somebody asks us about it, and we have to tell about it.
Then, we should tell it in a pro..., give proper background. Tell them the
proper consciousness and have that devotee to understand it properly. Otherwise,
we can injure that devotee's devotion, we will injure our devotion and we
pollute the whole atmosphere within the devotee community.

So, prajalpa can just sap away our spiritual energy. You know, what... what does
it mean sap away our spiritual energy? You know, the spiritual energy is not
some like, some fluid that flows to the body. The spiritual energy is the
basically the enthusiasm of practicing devotional service.

But when we find that actually people are, that, this person has that problem,
that person has that problem, that person has that problem, and we just talk
about all these things with the different people, then all these things sap away
our spiritual energy.

And actually speaking, we should not think that this is something new. As long
as the material world is there, there is the possibility of having difficulties.
There is the possibility of having faults. So it is nothing new. Srila
Prabhupada said that "do not be surprised that who states, be su..., do not be
surprised that who falls, be surprised that who stays.".

Krishna is also 
