Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tw3p5hDqG3k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=Tw3p5hDqG3k&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_026_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_2_Part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=SICjjhLlqxT-NisMuKYv9FCel_B8MTU0MDY1ODY5N0AxNTQwNTcyMjk3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction. It is Bhakti Sastri course.

Today, we conclude verse one, and we will begin verse two.

In the last part of verse one, we are discussing the purport of Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvasti Thakur from his anivritti commentary, as Srila
Prabhupada has explained it. So let us have a look at this purport what we
have discussed till now, and what we will discuss further.

So, it classifies the urges, which are given, the six urges into three
categories. The urges of the speech, the mind and the body. These three
correlate with the three aspects with which, we are meant to serve Krishna. The
triyandi sannyasi serves Krishna with all the three faculties, primary faculties
that we have. That is the body, the mind and the speech. So all these three,
which are actually meant to serve Krishna, these three faculties also drag us
away from Krishna. And, the urges that drag us away from Krishna can be
classified in these three categories. So here, in speech, we dicussed. Then in
mind, we discussed. And in the body, we discussed the tongue. And now, we will
discuss the next two, belly and genitals.

Now, when we discussed in the morning, earlier also about the belly and the
genitals, in quite a bit detail, essentially these three are connected, and the
important point to understand here is that ultimately each of us has to decide,
whether I will be a servant of the body, or I will be a master of the body.

Now, servant of the body means, we pander to its demands. Master of the body
means we use it for our purposes. So when, even when we are the master of the
body, actually speaking, we still remain the servant of Krishna. In fact, the
better a servant of Krishna we become, the more a master of the body we become.
And conversely the more a master of body we become, the better a servant of
Krishna also we can become.

These are not necessarily contrary attitudes. How can a master be a servant or a
servant be a master? Actually, even when are the master of the body, we are, our
primary identity is that we are servants of Krishna. And, in order to serve
Krishna properly, we have to master the vehicle that we have for the service of
Krishna. So, somebody can, may want to be a, a, maybe a lover of the nation.
And as a, because the person loves the country and wants to serve the country,
that person may become an expert a masterly gun fighter, or an expert fighter
aircraft pilot.

Now, that person attains expertise, but that expertise, that master over the
weaper or plane, is all motivated by the desire to serve the nation better. So
similarly, a devotee's desire to become a mater of the senses, a master of the
body, that is motivated by the desire to serve Krishna better.

The body is a vehicle which we have been given, and the more we have it in our
control, the better we can serve Krishna. So that is why this, the attitude of
being a master of the body, if it is separated from the overall underlying life
motive of being a servant of Krishna, then being a master of body can make us
proud. But actually, if our whole being is permeated by the desire to serve
Krishna, then the mastery over the body that we acquire is incorporated,
integrated into that desire to serve Krishna because it is a convenient tool. It
is, in fact, an essential tool for our service to Krishna.

Therefore, for a devotee, attaining self-mastery, attaining mastery over the
body, the mind, senses, this does not lead to pride. Because the devotee's
primary focus is on serving Krishna, not on bragging to oneself, or bragging to
the world how much mastery over the body I have got.

So, when we talk about controlling the belly, again, even when I say that, if
somebody is the master of the fighter pilot, is a master..., is a masterly
fighter pilot, that means the, the person is the master of the fighter plane,
he just knows how to move it right, how to left, how to move it down, how to
make it turn up, how to make it go in, change directions. Now that does not,
that mastery does not mean that the person completely neglects the fighter
plane, fighter flight.

Actually, flighter plane, the master pilot takes the, takes excellent care of
the fighter plane. Why? Because the fighter plane is essential for that master
fighter pilot to exhibit, exercise his skills, to utilise his skills for the
service of the nation. So similarly, we focus, we take care of the body
adequately. So the difference between the plane and the body is that, the plane
often has, the plane never has its own set of desires, the body is also dead,
and the body does not have set its own set of desires, but because we have
identified with the body in the past, that identified, misidentification of the
body and mind, body, mind, senses, that has created a set of default programs
within it. That has created a set of default tendencies.

And those default tendencies make the body go in a particular way, and we are
souls also going along that way. That means that we may sometimes personify the
mind, saying the mind is speaking like this, and when the mind speaks like that,
just neglect it, or just as it is, beat it, beat, silence it. So now, the mind:
is it a thing? Is it like a living person which has its own voice? No, the mind
is not, the mind is actually unconscious. Of course, it is subtle. It is not
gross matter. It is subtle matter. But still, it is unconcious.

But then how does it speak something? How does it tell us do this, do not do
this? I do not like chanting. I like, I want to enjoy. How does the mind say
all these things? These are basically the default programs that we have stored
in the mind. Just like if I work on a computer, in a computer, if we repeatedly
choose a particular option, then that option gets stored in the computer, and
that becomes chosen again and again by default. So when we repeatedly choose
something, that becomes a default. And then even without our wanting to choose
it, that option will come up prompt. Would you like to do this? Because that has
become the default option.

So like that, pandering to the mind, the senses, the body, that has been the
default option that we have chosen for a long time, and that is why that props
up. It is not exactly a separate distinct entity, but personification of the
mind is a tool that is used for us to recognise the reality and the gravity of
the battle with the mind for the sake of self-mastery.

So the, the point of this analysis is not to talk elaborately about the mind per
say. That we will be doing in the Bhagavad Gita. Here the focus is on
understanding that we need to take care of the body. So fighter pilot will take
care of the fighter plane. So that the masterly skills in using the fighter
plane can be exhibit..., it can be utilised. Similarly, a devotee has to take
care of the body. But the devotee does not pander to the body, does not satisfy
every one of the desires, urges that comes in.

So that is why when we eat, we need to eat adequately to nourish ourselves. We
should not in the name of being sense-controlled starve our body. But at the
same time, for us, more often than the extremity of starving the body, is the
expost, likelihood of excessively feeding the body, and thereby undermining its
performance. Undermining its capacity, its utility in Krishna's service. So as
devotees, both these extremes, Krishna discourages.

    naty-asnatas 'tu yogo 'sti
    na caikantam anasnatah
    na cati-svapna-silasya
    jagrato naiva carjuna

In the sixth chapter, seventeenth verse (?, it hould be 6.16?), Lord Krishna
says that, one should not, one who eats too much or eats too little, one who
sleeps too much or sleeps too little, such a person cannot become a yogi. And
then in the next verse, 6.18 (?, it should be 6.17?) he says therefore, be
regulated.

    yuktahara-viharasya
    yukta-cestasya karmasu
    yukta-svapnavabodhasya
    yogo bhavati duhkha-ha

That be regulated in eating, sleeping, recreation and work. And by such a
regulation, then when one practices yoga, by yoga, one will attain
transcendence. So when we talk about taking care of the belly, or not succumbing
to the urges of the belly, that means we provide the body whatever is required,
but not beyond that. And then, the same with genitals. We discussed about how
the principle is not to deprive, but to retrieve. To retrieve this particular
activity to its use, to its purpose, actual purpose, as it is in the part of
Lord's plan.

So now, Srila Prabhupada uses conclusion to this purport. He says the
conclusion, the essential theme of NOI is that ultimately we can only serve one
master.

You know, we cannot serve both the senses and Krishna. Either we serve Krishna,
or we serve the senses. So, certainly, we do not reject the senses in the sense
that we have to cut off those senses, emasculate the senses, but we have to
subordinate the senses. So now, those who serve the senses, they become godars,
as the Bha.., Srimad Bhagavatam in Prahlada Maharaja's section talks about this
verse, "adantago". So, Prabhupada quotes it also:

        matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā
        mitho ’bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām
        adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ
        punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām

So it is quite a frightening verse. What it is saying is that "matir na kṛṣṇe",
all of use want to have our, "matir", attracted to Krishna. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu would give the blessing, whenever somebody would meet him, if it were
a new person, "kṛṣṇe matirastu", may you become attracted to Krishna. And if
somebody was already a devotee of Krishna, then he would give, "krsne matirahu",
that may you stay attracted to Krishna. So our goal is to have our consciousness
attracted to Krishna.

"matir na kṛṣṇe", but it is said, but it is said over here that once "matir"
cannot be attracted to Krishna, "parataḥ svato vā", if, even if one tries
oneself, one tries by the guidance of others or one tries by combined efforts,
"parataḥ svato vā mitho ’bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām", if one has become, taken a
"gṛha-vratā", that means one has taken a determined, one is determined to hold
onto material enjoyment, to sense gratification.

"adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ", and such a person being "adānta-go", having
not attained control of the senses, the senses drag the person down to hellish
suffering. So, "punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām", and actually not only does a
person go to suffering. What does the person do in the dwell going to suffering?
The person is again engaging in the same thing, chewing the chewed, "punaḥ punaś
carvita-carvaṇānām", again and again, the person keeps eating the same thing,
and does not actually learn any, about any higher happiness in life.

So what is "punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām"? Eating, mating, sleeping,
defending. That is what we have done in so many lives in the past, and if we
keep doing it again, again and again, then we are not realising the privileged
opportunity that human life offers us. Human life offers us the opportunity to
access and experience spiritual happiness, something which other life forms
cannot do.

So, if we do the same thing which we have done. If we do the same thing which
all the other living beings are doing, then instead of choosing to be special,
we are choosing to be ordinary. And actually, it is not just ordinary, instead
of choosing the wonderful, we end up choosing the dreadful. Because when we
choose, when we do not serve Krishna, then our senses, they drag us down to
terrible activities, to sinful activities. And the result is dreadful. To suffer
in this life because of the constant craving, the constant agitation, the
constant frustration, and then in the next life also, there is further
suffering as a consequence of our misdeeds.

So this is the, the verse basically is saying that, the purport, it is talking
about the destiny of those who remain addicted to sense gratification. They will
simply chew the chewed and keep suffering in this and next life, and they will
not get attracted to Krishna, no matter what they do. They try their own
efforts, try with others' effort or try with consultation. Now, what does it
mean? Actually, it is like a disease. If I have a disease, then, say, if I have
got diabetes, and I want to cure, so I may try to cure myself, so I may go to
the doctor, and the doctor may tell me suppress sugar, and both of us may
consult and we may decide, ok, this is how I will take the treatment.

But if I just keep ingesting sugar constantly, and if I do not control my urge
to eat sugar, then no matter what treatment I take, the treatment is not going
to work. So in some cases, maybe in the future, maybe some scientists may
discard, may be able to find that I can eat sugar and still I can avoid
diabetes. But even if that happens, that does not apply to spiritual life. You
know, matter and spirit are opposites. If we get caught up in material
enjoyment, if we remain attached and addicted to material enjoyment, then our
consciousness stays in matter and if our consciousness stays caught up in
matter, then the consciousness cannot become spiritual.

If the consciousness cannot be spiritual, then it cannot experience Krishna's
grace, it cannot experience Krishna's presence, Krishna's love and therefore it
cannot experience Krishna Conscious happiness.

So these two are opposites. And that is why the attachment to material
enjoyment, when we decrease it, we redirect our consciousness towards Krishna,
then we can experience spiritual happiness. So the purpose of this whole point
is that "matir na kṛṣṇe", one cannot become attracted to Krishna if one is
attached to sense enjoyment. So now what do we do? We may say all, we all have
our attachments. First thing is that the attachments do not cross the boundaries
of dharma. We had the regulative principles and we follow them properly. That
itself keeps the attachments under the control, and within that, we try to bring
our consciousness closer and closer to Krishna, and more and more away from
matter. And in this way, we can move forward in our journey towards Krishna. So
we take things, one step at a time.

This is, this verse should make us sober, but at the same time, it should not
mae us scared. You know, the medicine is working, but for the work to become
manifest, then for the work's result to become manifest, then other conditions
also apply. For the person is diabetic, and somehow feels that I just cannot
give up sugar, but at least keep taking the medicine. If you do not take the
medicine, also you keep taking sugar, then this condition becomes worse. And
gradually, by taking the medicine, develop the willpower to give up the
attachment to sugar.

Similarly, even if we are unable to give up our material attachments, if you
feel that they are too strong, then that should not cause us to stop practicing
devotional service. Because only when we keep practicing devotional service,
will we gain the strength, will we gain the taste by which eventually, we will
be able to give up the lower taste. So, anything that happens, no matter how
strong our attachments, no matter how severe our faults, we should never become
discouraged by this, by hearing this kind of scriptural statements. Because
ultimately, our only source of spiritual strength is our Krishna Consciousness.
And Krishna Consciousness depends on our enthusiasm in Krishna Consciousness.

So, if I am discouraged, then I cannot be Krishna Conscious. If I cannot be
Krishna Conscious, then by default, I will be become, I will be becoming
materially conscious. Then, the very thing that has made me discouraged, I will
lose that very thing more, because that is what I am thinking about.

So, therefore, whatever be our condition, we enthusiastically keep practicing
Krishna Consciousness, and by gaining strength and taste from there, we battle
our attachments, and gradually give them up. So when we learn to serve Krishna,
and we become absorbed in the service of Krishna, then we become the controller
of the senses. And when we become the controller of the senses, then we are able
to advance nicely in spiritual life, steadily.

So this is the beginning of this particular book. It talked about how we all
have to bring the "vegas", the urges under control. Let us go to the next mantra
now. So, the mantra two is:

        atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca
        prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ
        jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca
        ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati

So, "vinaśyati" is destroyed, "ṣaḍbhir" is six, by these six activities,
"bhaktir" is destroyed. What are these six activities? "atyāhāraḥ", eating too
much, "prayāsaś ca", "prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ", "prajalpo", so "atyāhāraḥ" is
overeating, "prayāsaś" is overendeavoring, "prajalpo" is talking unnecessarily,
"niyamāgrahaḥ" is, Prabhupada will explain that, it can either be following
rules for the sake of following, "āgrahaḥ", or "āgrahaḥ", not following them at
all. "jana-saṅgaś ca", associating with materially minded people, "laulyaṁ",
greed, "ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati", so these six cause the "bhaktir" to get
destroyed. Let us look at Srila Prabhupada's translation:

"One's devotional service is spoiled when he becomes too entangled in the
following six activities: (1) eating more than necessary or collecting more
funds than required; (2) overendeavoring for mundane things that are very
difficult to obtain; (3) talking unnecessarily about mundane subject matters;
(4) Practicing the scriptural rules and regulations only for the sake of
following them and not for the sake of spiritual advancement, or rejecting the
rules and regulations of the scriptures and working independently or
whimsically; (5) associating with wordly-minded persons who are not interested
in Krishna consciousness; and (6) being greedy for mundane achievements."

So, let us have an overview of the purport of Srila Prabhupada. Before we go
into that, Srila Prabhupada first starts by giving a philosophical background.
He says that "Human life is meant for plain living and high thinking.". So why
is that? Because we are trapped in material existence, and there are three
energies of Krishna, the antaranga, bahiranga and tatastha, and to the extent,
we situate ourselves in the bahiranga shakti, so we are the tatastha shakti. We
are the marginal energy. The spiritual energy is the antaranga shakti. The
bahiranga is the external energy.

So to the extent, we get caught up in godly living as contrast to simply living,
then we are getting implicated, entangled in the external energy and then we
cannot become liberated. So, high thinking on the other hand helps us to think
about spirituality. High thinking does not mean just we look up high and think.
High thinking means we think high thoughts; thoughts about higher realities of
life, and the highest of all realities is Krishna. He is the "samambona":

        mattah parataram nanyat
        kincid asti dhananjaya

In 7.7 in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna say that He is the highest reality. So,
there is no truth higher than Him. So, high thinking ultimately means think to,
think of the highest object; highest reality. That is Krishna. So that, Krishna
is of course supremely spiritual, He is supreme spiritual reality, so then, we
want to, when we cultivate high thoughts, then by those cultivation of high
thoughts, we move from the marginal energy towards the superior energy, towards
the internal energy, antaranga shakti.

So, simple living saves us from getting entangled in the external energy, and
high thinking enables us to move towards the internal energy, towards the
spiritual energy. So this whole set of six verses, or six points in this verse,
are basically talking about how to implement simple living and high thinking.

So here, we look at this purport. So there is "atyāhāraḥ", "prayāsaś",
"jana-saṅgaś", "laulyaṁ", and there is of course "prajalpo" and "niyamāgrahaḥ"
over here. So let us look at each of these one-by-one in more detail.

So here these, how they spoil bhakti. That is what Srila Prabhupada is
explaining. Let us look at "atyāhāraḥ".

So "āhāraḥ" means to eat, to consume, and "atyāhāraḥ" means to eat too much. So,
"atyāhāraḥ" would mean that we eat too much. Now, eating is not just, so
"āhāraḥ" is not just for the sen..., for the tongue. Krishna uses the word when
one tries to control the senses, one feels as if one is becoming "nirahara".

        visaya vinivartante
        niraharasya dehinah

That in 2.59, he says when we try to control the senses, in two point, so he
says that, actually, "niraharasya dehinah", we feel as if we are not getting
"ahara", "ahar". Actually, for a drunk, for alcoholic, alcohol is not actually
an "ahar", but the person feels this is my "ahar". I need it. I cannot live
without it. So when we try to control the senses, then we feel as if we are not
get..., that hunger is not getting satisfied.

        niraharasya dehinah
        rasa-varjam raso 'py asya

So although one may not eat, but st..., one may not engage in that sense
gratificatory activity, but still the desire for that sense gratification
remains, but then "param drstva nivartate", when one gets a higher taste, then
one becomes free from that craving. One experiences a higher happiness. And then
the go..., the "nirahara" feeling goes away. So there is "ahar", not just for the
sen..., mouth, but the "ahar" for also eyes want to see good looking forms, the
hands, the body wants to touch soft objects like that.

So, now, when we talk about "ahar", Srila Prabhupada also includes that
accumulating too much. Because ultimately, possessiveness is the "ahar", for
the, is the expression of the "ahar" of the ego. The, Yes, there is "ahar" for
the tongue, there is "ahar" for the ego, the diet, the food, therefore the ego
is possessiveness. I own this house. I own this car. I own this factory. I own
this. So, accumulating too much is also an "atyāhār".

Now, Srila Prabhupada gives the example from nature for this that when, there
is, when the bag of rice is kept in the market..., in a public place, birds will
come and collect some things, and whatever they need, they will eat it and go
away. But human being comes along, the human being will grab all of it, and try
to save it for oneself.

Now what is one trying... what is Srila Prabhupada illustrating through this?
We may say, isn't it the sign of intelligence? Now, I am going to need grains
tomorrow, so better let me keep all the grains with me. Why keep it lying on the
street? It is actually, every example has a particular context and a particular
purpose. There are other places where Srila Prabhupada also talks about
importance of saving for the future. Srila Prabhupada says whatever we earn, a
significant percentage of that, 25%, we should save for future emergencies.

So that is a valid point which needs to be taken care of, but we should not mix
up analogies. The point of this analogy is that we have a grabbing mentality.
So, we are not talking about situation where there is shortage of food. We are
not talking about short situation where a person will not have something to eat
in the future. We are talking about simple principle that human beings, whenever
they see anything, they just want to grab it, and they want it as much as
possible.

Now, often when a person wants to grab more and more, the person is not really
thinking about, oh, in the future, I may not have something. At that time, when
the person takes it, it is just because of greed. Now, for example, now, if say,
we are a part of a, we are a part of a programme, and after that, gulab jamuns
are being served. And then there are hundred gulab jamuns and there are fifty
people. So everybody is going to get two gulab jamuns. But somehow, if some
person gets entry into the kitchen before the gulab jamun is served. Now, that
person is, will take two, not two, four, six, eight, ten, just grab it. Now, why
is that? That person is not thinking. Oh, tomorrow morning, I will not get
any breakfast, so I should eat as many gulab jamuns as possible. No, the point
there is, one is just caught up by the greed, the craving of the tongue.

So, this is similar over here. Saving is a valid exam..., valid point, saving
for the future. But irrespective of, but independent the concentration of the
future, human beings often accumulate not within, not out of the concern for the
future, but accumulate because of the greed for possessing more and more,
irrespective of its utility in the future. And irrespective the possibility that
they are grabbing may cause deprivation to others. There are, there are
billionairs who sometimes have, you know, five hundred shoes, or one thousand
dresses, now, they are not going, they are never going to wear so many shoes or
dresses. What is that possessiveness is so great? When they could very well give
that, instead of using that mind, they could use in charity, do some welfare
activity, even if they do not believe in God, they could do some material
welfare. They believe in God, they could do spiritual welfare, all-round
welfare.

So, the point of this example is we human beings have a tendency for "atyāhār".
Now, this tendency for "atyāhār" stays not only in the secular realm, but it
also comes in the religious realm. Coming in the religious realm means that this
tendency infects people who are practicing religion also. So, there is many
people practice dharma for the sake of "artha" and "kama". And Srila Prabhupada
quotes here in the Bhagavatam, Bhagavatam verse. He says:

        kāmasya nendriya prītir

and he says:

        dharmasya hy āpavargyasya

So dharma when it is practiced for the sake of at..., for gaining material
things, then it can become possibly "atyāhār". That means I get material things
and then I feel greedy. I want more and more and more. And religion also becomes
a tool for me to get more and more. Then, rather than religion becoming a means
to attain God, religion becomes a means to possess control and dominate the
world.

So, such a practice of religion, that is divorced from its ultimate purpose is
shortsighted. That is what the Bhagavatam rejects. Now certainly, we need things
in this world to live and they are important, but they are not all important.
They are important within their limited context of this world, these body needs.
But beyond that, our soul needs something beyond this body, and beyond this
world. It needs Krishna. And religion is ultimately meant to fulfill that
longing of the soul for Krishna.

So, the Bhagavatam focuses on "para dharma". So in 1.2.6, it first of all makes
sure the "para dharma" is that which involves practicing of pure devotional
service to Krishna.

        sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo
        yato bhaktir adhokṣaje
        ahaituky apratihatā
        yayātmā suprasīdati

That only that love, that loving service to the Supreme Lord, it is unmotivated
and uninterrupted, only that will satisfy the heart. Then after that, the
Bhagavatam talks about other kinds of dharma. And it says, no, these are the
kinds of dharma which one should not practice.

And in that, he descri..., it is described that actually, now, Srila Prabhupada
was once asked by one professor that, this comes in Lilamrta, that, you know,
you have written so much, if someone were to study a very small sample of your
teachings, to know what your actual message is, what would you like to tell
them? So, Prabhupada quoted these two verses. Let us look at these two verses.
1.2.9 which Srila Prabhupada quoted over here. So, 1.2.9 is talking, Prabhupada
says these verses are important because they are talking about the purpose of
life, so this verse and the next verse. This verse is:

        dharmasya hy āpavargyasya
        nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate
        nārthasya dharmaikāntasya
        kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ

He says "dharma" is for "āpavargyasya". "Dharma", the practice of "dharma" is for
attaining liberation. It is not for "artha". "Artha" will come as a byproduct,
but one should not focus on "artha". "nārthasya dharmaikāntasya", and if while
practicing "dharma" for the ultimate purpose, one gets "artha", for that "artha"
should not be used for "kāmo lābhāya". That should not be used for material
gains. That should not be used for material enjoyment.

And the next verse continues on. 1.2.10 is "kāmasya nendriya prītir", that
"kāma" should not be used for, we have desires. We cannot give up desires. But
the desires should not be used for sense gratification. Desired should be
directed towards spiritual inquiry.

        kāmasya nendriya prītir
        lābho jīveta yāvatā

As, how much should we endeavor at the material level as much as the sinful
living? "lābho jīveta yāvatā". And then "jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā". "jīvasya
tattva-jijñāsā" means that the purpose of human existence is spiritual inquiry.

        jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā
        nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ

That actually there is no other purpose of the life of human beings that "nārtho
yaś ceha karmabhiḥ". So, now here Srila Prabhupada is talking about, the
important point is that we have to endeavor for spiritual purpose. Now,
interestingly, this is in "prayasa", but let us look at this. What Srila
Prabhupada is saying is:

"If our endeavor (prayasa) is not to inquire about the Absolute Truth, we will
simply increase our endeavor to satisfy our artificial needs."

So we have the power of desiring, and we are going to direct it somewhere.
Either we direct it towards Krishna, or we direct it towards material things.
So, if we do, and according to our desire, we will endeavor. So if our endeavor
is not to inquiry about the Absolute Truth, then we will simply increase our
endeavor to satisfy our material needs.

So here, Srila Prabhupada is making the point that even religion should not be
used as a tool for "atyāhār". If you use religion as a tool for "atyāhār", then
we deprive ourselves of the true benefit of religion.

Now, moving forward, let us look at what is the philosophy Srila Prabhupada is
giving over here that here, he is talking about "atyāhār", about the futility of
"atyāhār", he talks. First, he talks about the philosophical principle that
human life is meant for something higher, but if one does not accept the
philosophical principle, one will have to bear the consequences. So, he tells
the anecdote of how a wealthy business was reborn as a cobbler, and in the same
house, in which, he which he had built with his own hard work, when he went in
next life, he was not allowed entering. He was just beaten out of there. So what
is the use of "atyāhār"? You know, we may accumulate a lot, but we will not
carry anything with us in future.

When we understand that ultimately the only thing that we will carry with us is
our consciousness. The way we have developed our consciousness, the evolution of
the consciousness is what will go with us. Then, we will focus much much more of
our energy on the evolution of our consciousness. Otherwise, we let ourselves
get distracted in pity things.

So, now in connection with this, Srila Prabhupada now talks about this at three
levels. He talks about "atyāhār" in terms of eating too much. Now, he has
explored that quite a bit already in the previous verse in terms of, wha...,
jihva vegan. Now, he talks about earning too much money. And then, he talks
about acquiring too much information. So, reading the books of the karmis,
reading the books of jnanis. Now, filling one's head with data. So actually, it
is, everybody feels that something is missing in my life. Something is missing.
There is something empty in my heart. And I want to feel that.

But people do not know what it is that is missing and what it..., how it is to
be filled. So some people, they try to get over that emptiness by filling their
belly with food. Other people try to fill their house with possessions. Some
other people try to fill their bank accounts with figures. Some other people try
to fill their name plates with degrees. Some other people try to fill their
brains with information. But all these people miss the point. The point is, it
is the heart that is empty. And the heart can be only filled by love. And that
love, if it is to fill the heart, then it has to be directed toward the Supreme
Lord. Because He alone is infinite. And He alone is capable of fully
reciprocating love with us.

So all these other endeavors, the endeavors for possessions, for money, for the
craving for food, the greed for, even for degrees, the greed for data in the
head, all this is a misdirection of the original pure longing of the soul for
Krishna. And the way to give up "atyāhār", as Srila Prabhupada says here is that
we should endeavor for the Absolute Truth. The stronger our desire for Krishna
will become, the weaker all our desires will become. So, we should not try to
give up "atyāhār" independent of intensifying our Krishna Consciousness. It will
be very difficult. But if you focus on intensifying our Krishna Consciousness,
then giving up "atyāhār" will automatically happen as a byproduct.

The essence of bhakti is not so much saying no. Bhakti, the essence of bhakti is
saying yes. Now, when we say yes to Krishna, a no to maya automatically happens.
If you just keep saying no to maya, no, no, no, no. It is difficult because
there is nothing pleasant in saying no. And especially, if something pleasant
is being offered, then saying no to something that seems pleasant, that is
definitely not pleasant. That is unpleasant.

So how do we say no to that which appears pleasant? We should have something
better to say yes to. Now, when we focus on, so it is not that, so we will focus
on saying yes to Krishna, then saying no to maya becomes easy. So, it is not
that for devotee has talent, has ambition. It is that the devotee should try to
live just above the poverty line, should not try to earn money, should not try
to acquire knowledge, should not try to endeavor. No, if a devotee has the
drive, has the ability, has the inclination, then surely, devotees can work, and
then they can try to spiritualise their activities.

So, they can spiritualise by directly engaging the talents in service of Krishna
if it is possible. If that is not possible, then they work in the world, but
then they use the fruits for Krishna's service, for Krishna's glorification. So
the point here is that whatever we do, our urges, our drives, they should not
take us away from Krishna. So, what will be "atyāhār" for whom will be different
depending on time, place and circumstance.

Rupa Goswami and Sanatan Goswami, they were pure devotees. Rupa Goswami has himself
written that we should not do "atyāhār". But then we know that Rupa, Sanatan
Goswamis, they had almost like a boatload of gold which they gave away when they
renounced the world. Now, we may say that, you know, wasn't ha..., isn't having
a boatload of gold is "atyāhār"? Actually speaking, it is not because they
ksatriyas, and ksatriyas are meant to be the custodians of wealth, and as
custodians, they do have a lot of wealth. So they are, they collect access on
behalf of the citizen, and then they give it as charity.

So the, Rupa and Sanatan Goswami were actually maitaining brahmanical culture.
They were supporting the brahmanas and vaishnavas, and they were creating an
enclave, a safe place for devotional culture within the onslau..., within the
overall onslaught on the devotional culture that was happening because of the
islamic rule at that time.

So they, their position, their positions, they were all used in service of
Krishna. So, you know, for a ksatriya, what is "atyāhār" will not be the same 
