Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8A3fv3VM9ok
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_029_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_3_Part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=8A3fv3VM9ok&redir_token=cfDiOvxDOFjY_fRJ9G9kkscOSZl8MTU0MTgyOTc5OUAxNTQxNzQzMzk5

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to our Nectar of Instruction, Bhakti Sastri course.

We completed mantra two last time. Now, it starts with the verse three. Now in
the verse three, Rupa Goswami talks about the six principles that are favorable
for the execution of devotional service. Earlier, we looked at the six principles
that are unfavorable.

Now, so these early near flow of thought, by which he... Now, from this verse
onwards, the focus will be on the six favorable principles and later on, he will
take one of them, association, and he will elaborate on them further in
subsequent verses also. So let us look at these, this, verse text three:

        utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
        tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt
        saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ
        ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

"prasidhyati", the earlier word was "vinaśyati". These are, these are things
which cause the bhakti to flourish, to grow. So what are these? "utsāhān"
enthusiasm, "niścayād" is confidence, "dhairyāt" is patience.
"tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt", other activities favorable to devotional service.
"saṅga-tyāgāt", giving up bad association, "sato vṛtteḥ", and then, the actions
of past sa..., past great acharyas, when you do these, by these bhakti
flourishes.

There are six principles favorable to the execution of pure devotional service:
(1) being enthusiastic, (2) endeavoring with confidence, (3) being patient, (4)
acting according to regulative principles [such as sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam -- hearing, chanting and remembering Krishna], (5) abandoning the
association of nondevotees, and (6) following in the footsteps of the previous
acaryas. These six principles undoubtedly assure the complete success of pure
devotional service.

So Prabhupada gives a very categorical explanation, they completely assure the
complete success of pure devotional service. So, let us look at this. Now, Srila
Prabhupada's first sentence itself is a sutra, which we will be elaborating on:

"Devotional service is not a matter of sentimental speculation or imaginative
ecstasy. Its substance is practical activity."

So what does it mean? Then Srila Prabhupada immediately quotes the
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu's definition of bhakti as:

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

So Srila Prabhupada's focus in this purport is on "śīlanaṁ". "śīlanaṁ" means
cultivation. And what kind of cultivation? "ānuśīlanaṁ", "kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ",
cultivation that is favorable to Krishna. And that he says is bhakti.

So, many temple..., people feel that devotion is just a matter of the heart. Oh,
she says, feel love for Krishna. And people do not feel... Why do you have to
exhibit devotion to the world? Srila Prabhupada, he is saying that it is not
sentimental speculation or imaginative ecstasy. So, what do these do two,
sentimental speculation? There can be speculation. Oh, for example somebody may say, I
closed my eyes and chanted. And I saw Radha Krishna dancing the rasa lila. Oh,
Krishna gave me his darshan. I feel so happy. I am so blessed. I am so
fortunate. Actually, what I am saying is I am so exalted. Do you understand how
exalted I am? That is what I am saying. Sentimental speculation or imaginative
ecstasy.

So, Srila Prabhupada is very cautiously protecting us from mistaking just our
pseudo visions for actual spiritual visions, and mistaking pseudo advancement
for real advancement. The essence of bhakti is not just some visions or some
feelings. The essence of bhakti is relationship. We want to develop a
relationship with Krishna. And relationship is developed, feelings are no doubt
very important, but relationship essentially is centered on commitments. Two
people can say we love each other, but then, the strength of their relationship
will not just depend on how often they say to you we love each other. It will
depend on how committed they are to each other, through thick and thin.

Similarly, our bhakti, bhakti is a feeling, but the feeling has to be expressed
through commitments. Now, the gopis are exalted devotees. Why? Because they are
so committed to Krishna. And how do we know that they are committed to Krishna?
One way is people say, oh, they left everything when Krishna called on the flute
and they went at night to meet him, loyalty. Yes, that leaving everything, and
when one is going to get some privilege and pleasure, oh, Krishna has called all
of us, and we ought to perform rasa lila with, also dance with him. There is
pleasure over there.

So, giving up something when we are going to get something pleasant is easy. But
we see the commitment of the gopis also. Of course, it is not easy, even when we
are getting something to give up something, but it is relatively speaking, it
may be possible for some people. But the gopis' commitment, we see at a much
deeper level, when we see what they did for Krishna, when they came to
Mathura's house when Krishna has got the headache.

So just to relieve Krishna's headache for one moment, they were ready to go to
hell for all of eternity. They knew that if they put the dust of Krishna's
feet, dust of our feet is put on Krishna's head, they, all of us go to hell. But
they were ready for that.
