Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8o4qMp8EuA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=imM3uMtGHU9z6wiRm0DuvtZfUgt8MTU0MTgzMDU4N0AxNTQxNzQ0MTg3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_031_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_3_Part_3_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=m8o4qMp8EuA&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instrument.

We are today going to complete the third of text:

        utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
        tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt
        saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ
        ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

So till now, we discussed till "tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt". So, last class we
discussed about patience. How we have to practice bhakti patiently knowing that
just as in cultivation, the results come in its own new course. When a woman
conceives, the conception takes its own course. We cannot accelerate it
artificially.

Then, we discussed "tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt". We elaborately discussed how
Srila Prabhupada's statement that neglect of the devotion, the regulative
principles can destroy bhakti. So, in that way, we discussed how the masses are
the opium of religion in the sense that in order to be populistic with the
masses, there is, the problems that first surface in religion becomes diluted,
contaminated, and perverted.

So, now, we will move on and discuss about "saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ". So, it is
interesting that some things are revealed not just by hea..., what is stated,
but in what context it is stated. So, for example, in the Brhan-naradiya Purana,
when it is talking about the chanting of the holy names, it is said that "harer
nama harer nama harer nama", so three times the name of Hari comes, and then
"iva kevalam". That is also an emphasis. You could say fourth and fifth
emphases if you want, and "nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva", so that is three more
emphases in a sense that there are eight points, eight wa..., eight times, this
is emphasised.

So, it is difficult to conceive how in a single sentence, the same point could
be emphasi..., made more emphatic than this. If one message is to be given. This
is given in the, probably, this is probably the most emphatic way in which a
person could give that message. So, once we understand this point "nasty eva
nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha", so like that, when we see something
repeated, that repetation need not necessarily indicate carelessness in speech,
or incoherence, especially when it is coming in a revela..., in a sacred book,
then it means that is a profound meaning over there.

And that profound meaning involves a lot of things. So, here, when we see the
"saṅga-tyāgāt" coming, earlier we had seen that in the previous text, Rupa
Goswami had made the same point, in a different way. What had he made the point
there? There, it was the point of giving up bad association. Now, the same point
is being said over here, "saṅga-tyāgāt". So, actually speaking, giving up bad
association is considered to be a means by which one can advance in devotional
service. So, having bad association will cause destruction of devotional
service, and giving up bad association will cause the development of devotional
service.

So, what does this imply? This simply implies that actually, the, su..., such an
important principle that Rupa Goswami considered it fit to be repeated twice.
So, the double repetation serves its own purpose. It reminds us that it is a
cardinal principle which cannot be neglected. Now, we discussed in the, last
time, when we discussed about bad association, how bad association can influence
us in terms of desires. It can pollute our desires. It can pollute our
intelligence. It can pollute our faith.

So, similarly, good association can purify our desires. It can strengthen our
faith. And it can s..., clarify our intelligence. So, like that, it works both
way. So, in, where all the other points are being talked positively, "utsāhān"
niścayād", "dhairyāt". These are positive does. So why within a positive list, a
negative point is brought about? So, "utsāhān", "niścayād, "dhairyāt",
"tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt", and "sato vṛtteḥ", all these are positive points,
but within that, "saṅga-tyāgāt", that a negative point is brought about,
"saṅga-tyāgāt", giving up bad association. Why such a point is given?

Because this is such a cardinal point that just by giving bad association, the
negative desires that keep coming inside us, will decrease. And we will become
more open to positive spiritual desires. So, we can consider that we are souls.
We are small units of consciousness. And we are present in this vast material
world. And this, this is filled with souls like us. But all these souls
are contaminated by material consciousness, material desires. And we are all
interacting with each other. So, this interaction produces many many material
desires. And those material desires get produced more and more and more, the
result of that is, the spreading, expanding of material existence.

So, when one wants to minimise one's material desires. There are two ways in
which material desires come. One is from inside, from our own memory from the
past. The other is from outside, from the culture. So, now, those which come
from inside, we have to individually fight. That means we do not nourish them.
We do not cherish them. But we fight them and curve them. And those which come
from outside, that also we have to minimise them. So one of the most powerful
ways of minimising bad association, bad, the contamination due to negative
desires, is to avoid those people who are carriers of those desires.

So, this is not so much a looking down at materialists. That I am pure. You are
impure. And because you are impure, I will not associate with you. This
perspective is not based so much on moral superiority of ourselves or others. It
is based on simple and essential understanding of spiritual health. You know, I
have to try to recover my spiritual health. And if somebody is infected, it is
not that person is necessarily lower than me. But that person's infection should
not come to me.

So, therefore, I have to protect myself. So, when we avoid non-devotee association,
that does not mean that we have to look down at non-devotees and we treat them
as if they are lower than human beings. No, we have to respect everyone.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said we should respect even a tree. Shou..., a devotee
respects even an ant, what to speak of a human being. So, certainly, human
beings need to be respected, but more important is that we recognise that we
have to protect ourselves.

When a patient is sick in an infected area, or in a, patient is in an area,
person is in an area where there is an epidemic, then the patient, per that
person, who may or may not be a patient, that person has to be careful that,
careful so that the infection does not come up on him or her. So, how will that
ta..., care be taken? That will be by the practice of caution. So, one has to be
cautious. Ok, that some people are infected. I have to keep a safe distance from
them. Similarly, we have to protect ourselves.

Naturally, when we say why should we not feel moral superiority? You know, I am
superior to them. That they are fallen. I am not. Actually, if we look in
our hearts, privately, we recognise that we ourselves are also fallen. The only
difference is that we have been given a process by which we can fall ourselves
from the fallen state. And maybe we have risen ourselves a little bit. And that
is how we have come to a particular state now. So the important point is to
recognise that we are all trying to heal ourselves. And whatever is favorable
for our healing, we have to do.

So, if we look at the healing metaphor, then "utsāhān", "niścayād", "dhairyāt",
we discussed how one has to have faith that the medicine will cure, may have the
enthusiasm to take the medicine, and the patience that, ok, it is not that I can
expect the healing to happen overnight. So, I have to be patient enough for the
treatment to take its course. Then:

        utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt
        tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

So following the regulative principles means the doctor may say that these are
these things that you have to do, these are things you have to avoid. So,
especially when the things to avoid are told, they have to be followed. Then,
that we discussed earlier about how spiritual life can be practiced at different
levels. That means, you know the standard should be that if a person has
diabetes, it is best the person does not take sugar at all, and just focuses on
taking medicines and healthy food.

But if the person is unable to give up sugar, then it should not mean that the
patient should not be allowed any treatment only. If you are going to eat sugar,
I will not treat you at all. Doctors cannot say like that. Doctors also
have to accommodate and provide some system by which while taking sugar, or, so
that person can take the medicine and at least tain some semblance of health,
surely that person will not recover as well or as fast as someone who follows
the treatment fully and avoid sugar entirely, or minimise sugar to bare level,
bare minimum, but such a person who cannot live without sugar, that person is
allowed sugar, but is also told that to take the medicine.

So, there, the point is not to cure the person, but to prevent the worsening of
the condition of that person, and to help that person to make some minimum,
minimal elevation. Similarly, some people are so materially contaminated
that they cannot approach transcendence immediately. So, for such people, there
is a progression given. And for them, the partial treatment may be given, where
they may be told that you can practice, you can just take these medicines, but
avoid that. So, yes, no, we cannot avoid those. Ok, at least take the medicine.

Now, is that a compromise? It is a compromise if the standard is not told. There
is a difference between a compromised principle and a principled compromise. A
compromised principle means that the principle is there, and one just makes a
compromise and neglects the principle. Whereas a principled compromise means
that one understands, ok, this is the principle, and thinks how this principle
is to be applied, and how if somebody ca..., is not up to that principle, then a
lower level principle has got. So, a compromised principle means that a
principle is neglected or rejected. But a principled compromise means when a
person is not capable of following a higher principle, then a lower principle is
given.

So, for example, in the scripture sometimes, those people are attached to eating
meat, they are given a facility to eat meat on specific days within religious
regulation. They can go to a Kali temple and do that. So, that is an example of
a principled compromise. That means rather than rejecting the principles of
following scripture, following God, one accepts that principle, but one finds a
level of instruction that is suitable for one's practice. And, in that way, one
advances. So that way, one is able to stay within the recovery program.
Although, one may not be in the fast part of recovery.

So if a person is not allowed, if you do not give this up, then you will not be
allowed any treatment only. Such a person is, if the person cannot take this
strict treatment, the person is just kicked out of the treatment, of the
recovery program. So, the re..., the problem is not that the slow recovery
program is given, but the problem comes when the slower recovery program is not
told clearly as that is. This is the level you want to follow. This is going to
take you a long time for to progre..., to cure, to become cured. This is the
level you want to follow. You will get cured much faster.

So, when that is not told that you are going to face problems because you are
not doing properly, and your recovery will be much slower. Then the lower
principle will become the standard principle. And that is where the problem
comes. So, if as long as that does not happen, that the lower principle does not
become the standard principle. When understand that this is the standard
principle. But car..., I am not able to follow at this level. So, I had been
given a lower principle. Then, that is not a compromised principe. That is a
principle to compromise.

So, sometimes, scriptures give us this principled compromise. So that principled
compromise can be applied in various fields of our spiritual life. So, for
example, you know, those who are in the householder ashram, grihasta ashram,
and those in the brahmacari ashram, the amount of time, the amount of energy,
the level of sadhana, the level of seva, that the two ashrams provide
facilities for are different. So, in terms of time and our direct engagement,
the grihasta ashram cannot offer all as much, cannot allow as much time as
brahmacari ashram. But that does not mean that necessarily, the grihasta ashram
is a compromise. It can, it is not a compromised principle. It is a principled
compromise.

That means one understands that my goal is Sri Krishna. But I cannot take this
track. I take this track. And both are valid tracks on the spiritual path. So,
if one just says, ok, if I cannot buy brahmacari, there is no glamour in my
spiritual life. Therefore, I will not practice spiritual life only. I will go
back to sense gratification. I reject the principle entirely. Then, what is
happening? That is not just a principle compromised. One compromises the
principle entirely. And that is a loss.

So, how to practice at what level? The acharyas are needed fo..., to tell us
that. And they tell us according to time, place and circumstance. So,
"saṅga-tyāgāt" is also a principle that has to be applied according to time,
place and circumstance. How much can we avoid the association of non,
non-devotees? That is not something which can be told for everyone as a standard
rule.

First point, I said is, avoiding the association of non-devotees does not mean
that we look down upon them. Because nothing alienates people faster than the
feeling that they are looked down upon by others. So, when somebody looks down
at us, we look away from that person. You know, we do not want to look at that
person. We would not care for that person. So, we want people to care for
Krishna. We want people to come to Krishna's lotus feet. And how will they come
if we do not care for them? If we look down upon them, we are not really caring
for them. Because we are not respecting them as human beings. We are not
respecting them as parts of Krishna. We are not respecting them as lost souls
who are potential devotees.

So, therefore, when we talk about avoiding bad association, we will, it
essentially means that association which is harmful for our devotion, that we
have to avoid. We discussed earlier about the three degrees in that, there can
be devotional association. There can be non-devotional association. There is
anti-devotional association.

So, non-devotional association mean..., can more or less be, like, they are
people in the ignorant, "ishvare tadinesu balisesu du satsusa". Wwe discussed
this in the Isopanisad that madhyam adikari sees Supreme Lord as a goal, object
of affection, the devotees, that is devotional assocation, that is, they see
that as a dose source of friendship. And "balisesu", those who are ignorant,
those who are innocent, for them, there is "krupa". So, those sou..., that, then
there is "dusatsu", those who are envious, for them there is "upeksa". That
means if we have these three levels, we can put Krishna outside in a different
circle entirely, try to love Krishna.

But the dev..., with devotional association, there is friendship. With
non-devotional association, if it is innocent, then there is, we try to show
mercy. We try to give Krishna knowledge. We try to be instrument for Krishna's
love. And then for the anti-devotional association, one has to neglect it, one
keeps a safe distance from it, so one does not entangled and contaminated.
"saṅga-tyāgāt" refers primarily to anti-devotional association, the association
which makes the practice of our spiritual life extremely difficult. Because
there is a direct and strain attack on our faith.

Sometimes, the whole attack may be intermittent and indirect. But still, if
there is attack on our faith periodically, then we understand that that is
anti-devotional association. And we have to protect ourselves from it. So, how
do we protect ourselves from the anti-devotional association? That brings us to
the most important point that that is by coming to devotee association. Because
we are social creatures. And being social creatures, we all need association.
So, if we do not have an association where we can share our values, then we will
have to find some other association, and we will start sharing the values of
that association.

As devotee..., as human beings, as social beings, as spiritual beings, we all
need a sense of belonging. I feel that I belong to a group, whose values I can
respect, and whose members respect me. So if that, we can find such a group, a
group whose values I respect. Ok, these people stand for this. And I respect
those values. And as an added boost, if those people are also respecting us.
This is potential devotee. This is good devotee. Yes, he is a very pre..., he is
precious member of our community. We care for him. Then, when both are there.
That means we care for the values that the group stands for. And one of the
values of the group is that it cares for its members. Then such a group is
wonderful.

And Srila Prabhupada established ISKCON just for creating such a group. It is a
forum where people can come together and reciprocate affection, reciprocate
love, and thereby go closer and closer to Krishna. So, now how do we do this
in our specific individual lives? "saṅga-tyāgāt", we do it primarily by making
circles of association, in many ways. Circles of association is one way. That
means if say, I am here, at the origin. Then I create a circle of my closest
associates, then close associate, close friends. Then, I make another circle of
those who are formal, corradial, but at the same time formal. And there are
outside that, there are friends who are entirely formal. I do not talk much with
them, but I, we do not have anything negative. And beyond that are people with
whom we have some flyers coming up, some spark flying, whenever there is
contact. The sparks may be direct or indirect. That means there may be open
conflicts at times, or there may be co-hold conflicts of values.

So, at such times, we have to protect our bhakti. 20:30
