Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iUMv2T5DGZQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_034_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_5_Part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=rCEGv7PKC_mGV0Z0QApDtZJzJC98MTU0MTgzMDY4N0AxNTQxNzQ0Mjg3&v=iUMv2T5DGZQ&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction study course of the part of the
Bhakti Sastri. We esta..., previous class, we completed the fourth text. So, the
fourth text is the beginning of the section that talks about association. And we
discussed about the six full loving exchanges. You know, that is general for
reciprocation with all devotees. Now, the fifth verse moves forward, and points
out that there are multiple levels of devotees, and with different devotees, we
need to reciprocate differently. So let us discuss that based on the fifth text.

        kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta
        dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam
        śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-
        nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā

So, "kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta", so "giri" is tongue or mouth. So,
when Krishna is there on the tongue of some person, that person deserves
respect. "manasādriyeta", what kind of respect? Respectful offering with the
mind. We should respect that person. This is not ordinary person. Among the
millions and billions of living beings, this person is chanting the holy names
of Krishna, this very special. So, I respect that person.

And then "dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś", then if somebody has actually taken
initi..., initiaton, and "bhajantam īśam", and then after the initiation, that
person is bringing worship. That means that person is bringing deity worship,
here it is referred to. So, initiation refers, not just to first initiation, but
second initiation also. Then, "cet praṇati", so at that time, "praṇati", one
should offer obeisances to such a person.

And then "bhajana-vijñam, "śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-", "śuśrūṣayā"
means to serve humbly. "bhajana", to hear and to serve. So, hearing itself is a
service, and there are other kind of services also. "bhajana-vijñam ananyam
anya-", so one who is "bhajana-vijñam", and what kind of "anya-", "ananyam",
"bhajana", "ananyam". and then "anya-nindādi-śūnya". So, that person has no
inclination to criticise others. "hṛdam", then that, not only that person not
criticise, but that person has no inclination to criticise in the heart also.

"hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā", so if one, one should desire that association,
when one gets the association, one should cherish that association and treasure
it. And one should faithfully serve. So, many, many times, we may not criticise
because we are afraid of the backlash that will come from criticism. We want to
burst out and speak a lot of things, but say, for example, since working in
a company, and the boss is very tyrannical. One wants to burst out, but that
person does not burst out because there is a backlash that will leave f..., feared.

So, there is inclination, but there is still not the criticism, whereas here
there is actually no inclination to criticise also. This does not mean that they
would never criticise us, but their inner inclination to criticise means one does
not get any delight in criticising. So, in that sense, there is no inclination.
Let us look at Srila Prabhupada's translation.

"One should mentally honor the devotee who chants the holy name of Lord Krishna,
one should offer humble obeisances to the devotee who has undergone spiritual
initiation [diksa] and is engaged in worshiping the Deity, and one should
associate with and faithfully serve that Pure devotee who is advanced in
undeviated devotional service and whose heart is completely devoid of the
propensity to criticise others."

This is describing three levels of devotees. So, the first is the kanistha level,
"kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta", that person is chil..., chanting Hare
Krishna. Whatever be the understanding of that person. That does not matter. It
is, at least chanting Hare Krishna. So, that person comes to the temple, and
prays in front of the deity, chants the names, now "manasādriyeta". That is
kanistha.

Then, that person takes initiation, starts serious worship, that is a madhyama.
And that person who is completely devoted to the worship of the Lord, undeviated
worship of the Lord, and that person is not at all inclined to criticise others.
That is an uttama adikari.

Now, among these three kinds of people, all three are important for our
spiritual advancement. The spiritual master, or spiritual guides, they need,
they need to be more advanced than us. So, our spiritual master will be, you
know, uttama adikari, or a very advanced madhyam adikari. And then, there is
kanistha adikari. So, Srila Prabhupada wanted all of us to raise from kanistha
at least to the madhyama level. Because we discussed earlier in our Isopanisad
course that primary difference between a kanistha and a madhyama is the
appreciation of devotees. So, if one not only not appreciate devotees, oh, I
have direct relationship with Krishna, then such a notion is actually a kanistha
notion. It is not an uttama notion. It is a, so madhyamas understand that I have
relationship with Krishna, but that relationship will be developed by how we
relate with others also.

So kanistha thinks that I just relate with Krishna, I come to the temple, I
worship the deity, after that, I go back home, whatever I do, it does not
matter. And how we deal with others, does not matter. You know, I can shout at
others. I can be in rajaguna, tamaguna while dealing with other people. But as
long as I come and fold my hands in front of the deity, do some puja, offer some
dakshina, that is all that I need to do. Then, I am a religious person.

No, but a madhyama understands, no, bhakti is not a part time activity. Bhakti
is actually a full-time activity. You know, one of the main differences between
those who practice as a traditional culture, and those who practice bhakti as a
sadhana. So, we could say that, in a generic sense, not in a very precise sense,
but in a generic sense, you know, those who are ISKCON devotees, and those who
are general hindus, even if they are worshipping Krishna, the difference is
that, for those who are practicing bhakti because of cultural reasons, traditional
reasons, for them, bhakti is a part of life.

Whereas for serious devotees, bhakti is not just a part of life. Bhakti is their
whole life. In fact, they understand life is a part of bhakti. What does it mean
life is a part of bhakti? It means that actually bhakti is something which goes
on throuh many, many lives. And it is a, it is very rare and special that
somebody attains perfection in just one life time. So, when extends over many
life times, that process of extension over multiple life times means that this
life is just a part of the long process of bhakti, which ultimately takes us
back to Krishna's lotus feet.

So, we may have done so some "agjana suprati santil" in previous life, or some
spiritual inclination, we might have had in previous life, that is why we have
come to Krishna in this life. Now, it is of course, because of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and Srila Prabhupada's mercy, that we can return back to Krishna even
in this one life. But otherwise, it takes effort. "bahunam janmanam mante", it
is said. So:

        tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
        labhate paurva-dehikam
        yatate ca tato bhuyah
        samsiddhau kuru-nandana

        prayatnad yatamanas tu
        yogi samsuddha-kilbisah
        aneka-janma-samsiddhas
        tato yati param gatim

So, in 6.44 and 6.45 in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna talks about how one whatever
spiritual attraction one has developed in an earler life, one still carries that
with oneself, and then one keeps endeavoring. One starts practicing spiritual
life, and one endeavors strictly, "prayatnad yatamanas tu yogi
samsuddha-kilbisah", one because purified of all impurities, and
"aneka-janma-samsiddhas", it may take many life times, then "tato yati param
gatim", one attains the supreme destination.

So, so that means for a serious devotee who has a philosophical vision of
things, understands that life is a part of bhakti. That means bhakti has been
going on through many lives and this life can be the last part. Just like in a
marathon, there is a final lap. Just last lap has to be covered. So, we can,
this can be our final lap. Or we can have many more laps depe..., after this, 
depending on how seriously we practice spiritual life.

Now, when we talk about the practice of bhakti, what are we essentially talking
about? That, conception is different for a kanistha and a madhyama. So, kanistha
thinks just going some, doing some religious rituals, like worshipping the
deity, going to holy place, chanting the holy names, that is enough. Now, that
is important, no doubt. But all this is meant to develop our relationship with
Krishna. And our relationship with Krishna is not in isolation. It is in
connection with those, all those who have relationship with Krishna. So,
spiritual world is not a place of silent meditation, silent exclusive meditation
on Krishna. Yes, everybody is focused on meditating on Krishna, but they are all
the community, and they are all together serving Krishna in the spiritual world.

So, that is what we aspire to do. Now, when we look at this particular verse.
So, it is talking about different devotees beingi offered different levels of
respect. So, even a new person is "manasādriyeta", he should be offered respect
with the mind. And the serious devotee should be offered obeisances, going down.
And the advanced devotee should not only be offered obeisances, but should be
offered submissive hearing, and one should hanker for that association. 

Of course, we offer obeisances. Of course, we offer respect, but more than that
we also hanker for that association. Because through that association, we make
rapid spiritual advancement. Because essentially, we get the desire, that
"ananyam", "bhajana-vijñam", that undeviated desire to serve Krishna from their
heart through their lips, when we hear it from the, when we serve them, that
desire comes to us. And when that desire comes to us, then our heart also
becomes permuated with similar desires to serve Krishna, and other desires get
subordinated or silenced. And that is how we become progressively purified on
the spiritual path. So, let us have a look at this purport.

So, here we see there is the description of kanistha, madhyama and then uttama.
So, the kanistha, what does kanistha do? Worships only the deity and then
behaves badly with devotees. It is not that, the, intentionally badly with
devotees, but just does not realise the value of devotees. So, therefore, if
there are any differences, then there are conflicts. So as we say, the kanistha
is called as neophyte. So, neophyte means new fight, always keeps finding new
reasons to fight with each other. And then, a harinam initiated, trying to
chant. So, now, when you say "kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ", now, this is not
necessarily with a devotion. It is just, there is some starting of chanting, is
some starting chanting is there, but it is not very committed, it is not very
pure, it is not very focused, it is just a pliable faith, soft and unsteady.

Now, the terming, terms, kanistha, madhyama and uttama, they are used by
different acharyas, and not all the time, when they used the words, all of the
time, they mean the same thing. Now, the word kanistha, at some other places, is
used by Bhaktivinoda Thakur in his Krishna Samhita. And there, he uses madhyama,
and he uses it in a slightly different context over there. So, kanistha, he
says, those who only see external things. Madhyama is, he says, those who are
more intellectual. And uttama are the transcendental devotees. So, he uses the
terminology, and if we look at the futher implications of what he is
describing, there, the madhyama term refers to something slightly different. It
is more of people who are intellectually inclined. They are not necessarily
devoteed also. But they are, they are discriminating. Ok, they go, they go
beyond appearance and they try to look at the substance.

So, when he wr..., he wrote the book Krishna Samhita, he wanted to attract
intellectual people who were, who were repelled by the simplistic ritualism of
vaishnavism. And tho..., those people were thinking, all these differe...,
different people, they have their different rituals and they will all get
divided by that. So, some people will worship Durga, some people will worship
Vishnu, some people will worship Rama, some people will worship Shiva. So, all
these are external rituals. So, these external rituals create division. So we
have to go beyond external rituals. So, those people considered ritualism as
revision and external. So, they wanted to go deeper. So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur
normally sort of flatters them. Yes, there are people who see externals, but
then you are, there are higher people who see substance. And they are madhyamas.

So in the, directly, the way he describes, he says, you people are madhyamas.
You are intellectual. You can see deeper. But then he says, actually, there is a
higher level also. And that is the uttama. And then at the uttama level,
actually, one goes beyond the material, the externals, one receives the
substance, but in that substance, one sees variety. And there is a
transcendental reality that is pursued by through samadhi, through spiritual
vision. And the uttama is at that level. And the scriptures, actually, guide us
to that level if we follow the scriptural processes properly.

So, basically, when he uses word madhyama to refer to intellectuals, who
were not even necessarily serious sadhakas, not even kanisthas in a sense, he
was using that in a flattering sense to get them to recognise, ok, there is a
higher level also, do not dismiss the whole religious culture just because you
see some superficiality. These rituals, they have their original spiritual
foundations, prototypes on which they are based over here. And those who
understand those proto..., those originals and based on that, they practice,
they are definitely advanced.

So, of course, Krishna Samhita was a complex book, and we are not going to go
into analysis of that book here. Our essential focus right now is on the,
understanding the terms, kanistha, madhyama and uttama. Now, here, in this
particular section, Rupa Goswami does not use the words kanistha, madhyama and
uttama. He just generally desribes the three levels of devotees. From the
sanskrit, we can make out he is talking about three different levels of
devotees. And after he described these three levels, Prabhupada based on the
other writings in the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, including Rupa Goswami's own
writings, he gives this typology, nomenclature.

Now, the Bhagavatam uses these. We discussed this in our Isopanisad course. The
Bhagavatam gives ver..., there are verses, which talk about characteristic of
advanced devotee, intermediate devotee, and new devotee, new spiritualist. And
there also, the terms are not used. This is, "isavaye bhagavato tamah", which is
uttama bhagavata, which is a madhyama, which is a "prākṛtaḥ". So, there are the
words used "uttama", "madhyama", and "prākṛtaḥ" are there. So, "prākṛtaḥ" is
materialistic, like we use your "prākṛtaḥ" for sahajiyas. So, "prākṛtaḥ" means,
"prakṛti" is material nature, so "prākṛtaḥ" is material. So one who sees
material things alone, that person is kanistha.

So, the adikari, the concept of adikar, is something which is extremely
important, it is fundamental in Vedic thought and Vedic culture. See, adikar
means authority. So, that is the sanskrit meaning. And adikari is one who has
authority, one is, in one sense, authoritative. So, kanistha adikari means one
whose authority is inferior. Uttama adikari means one whose authority is
excellent. It is superior. It is excellent. So what determines one's authority?
It is not birth. You know, that, some people who claim to follow the Vedic
tradition, they say that only brahmanas have the rights to practice spiritual
life.

So, that, no, brahmana only has the right to study scriptures and they alone can
teach scriptures. So Srila Prabhupada said, that is true, brahmanas, but who are
the brahmanas? It is not just a person who is born in a brahminical family, one
who has acquired brahminical qualifications. And if somebody sincerely studies
under the guidance of a spiritual master, then even that person who does not
have brahminical qualifications, can also develop brahminical qualifications.
So, it is a progression which moves upwards. And it is not a static from birth
till death. Something which we just follow forever fixed. But the adikar is
determined by our level of consciousness, our frame of reference in life.
Different people have different levels of consciousness, different frames of
reference.

So, the kanistha fails to see anything beyond matter. And that inability to
pursue higher realities what makes the person a kanistha. So, it is not that
kanistha is forbidden from certain things. It is simply that one's own
consciousness makes certain things impossible for a person to see. And that is
why that person is told ok, do not go in these directions right now. And this is
not necessarily any kind of discrimination. It is simply progression. Now, a
student who starts studying mathematics, is in right now, in say, third standard.
And the student takes up a book of the, of quantum, of say, triple integral
calculus. Now, the student cannot understand anything. What will the student be
told? You do not study this right now. You can study this later. Now, is it
discrimination? Why? Why do you not allow me to study this? No, no, no, you
cannot study this. Why? I want to study it. Yes, but at that level, the student
cannot understand.

Somebody may actually, in early, say, you are, if you see, the student has to
study, and when they have to study, often they go to school, they pay fees,
they purchase books, and then they study. Now, if a person goes to PhD or
postdoctoral research, at that time, the person is, in a sense, doing the same
thing. He is taking books and study. But there, the dynamics are very different.
Now, there, actually when the person studies, the person is paid for studying.
The person is provided the books, the person is provided the facility for
studying, and on top of that, that person is provided payment also for studying.
So, what is the difference?

The child is doing the same activity and the postdoctorate person, such, fellow
does the same activity. But one has to pay. The other is paid. Why there difference?
Because there is a progression. And then the postdoctoral stud..., postdoctoral
research fellow's studies are going to lead to a beneficial output for society.
Whereas this is just a beginning stage, where the person is building up his own
career, his or her own career. So, things are progressive.

So, similarly, in the Vedic culture, those are more advanced, they are given
more facilities. And that is because their productivity, it, they are more
spiritually advanced, they are pleasing Krishna more, and even from the world's
point of view, their productivity is much more. So, it is not a discrimination.
It is a progression. And the important of point of progression is the, in the
bhakti tradition at least, the progression is universally open for everyone. It
is not that some, for some people, it is allowed, some people, it is not
allowed. It is allowed for everyone. So, when he says, somebody is a kanistha,
that does not mean that person has to permanently be a kanistha. It can rise
from kanistha to madhyama and to uttama. That is a progression by which the
person will rise. So, that is how a person grows in spiritual life.

So, now, after that, if we look at the madhyama, so the madhyama is having, as
we have discussed earlier, four characteristics:

        prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā
        yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ

So, now, the kani..., madhyama has "prema" for Krishna, is the object of love,
"kṛpo" for the innocent, "maitrī" for the devotees, and "opekṣā" for the
atheists. And this way, the madhyama understands that I have to interact
differently with different people because they have dispositions towards
Krishna. And how I interact with them is going to reflect my Krishna
Consciousness and it is going to affect my Krishna Consciousness also. So, it
reflects and it affects. How does it, how do the two relate? Reflect and affect?
If I am Krishna Consciousness, and if somebody is blasphemous of Krishna, you
know, if I do not feel any emotions by that, then actually, it reflects that my
Krishna Consciousness is not very deep. You know, if somebody is blaspheming
Krishna, I should feel distressed. Because if I love Krishna, you know, if I
love anyone, and that person is criticised, that now means that I, I do not like
that criticism. I feel pain by that. And I would like to defend it, my love, my
Lord one against that criticism..

So, same applies to a devotee's relationship with Krishna. The devotee does not
want to hear criticism. And when there is a criticism of Krishna, blaspheme of
Krishna, or Krishna's devotees, the devotee wants to counter that. So, here, we
do not see that, Hanuman, when he heard Ravana minimising Lord Rama, Hanuman did
not say, you know, I may calm, I will be understood, I will be siren. No. He got
angry. And that anger is an expression of his devotion. So, the madhyama in that
sense has discrimination and by that discrimination, the madhyama understands
this is the level I should practice. You know. This is the level I should
practice. You know. And this is how I should deal with it now. So if somebody is
blaspheming, then he either tries to counter it or then he, or moves away from
there. So, "opekṣā".

So, like that, madhyama sees that my Krishna Consciousness will be reflected
through my behavior. So, if I, when Krishna is blasphemed, and I do not feel
bad, that means my, I, my Krishna Consciousness is very superficial. It is not
deep. And only, there is my behavior reflect my Krishna Consciousness, my
behavior, the different kinds of people will affect my Krishna Consciousness.
For example, if I meet a new person, who is innocent. And then, if I try to
share Krishna Consciousness with that person, the desire to share Krishna
Consciousness with that person reflects my Krishna Consciousness. Because I want
the soul is also part of Krishna, but has become estranged from Krishna. Now, I
have to help the soul back, to go back to Krishna.

So, with that sort of attitude, that sort of disposition, that sort of concern,
for connecting Krishna's lost children with Krishna, that ref..., that reflects
my Krishna Consciousness. If that is not there, then again, my Krishna
Consciousness is superficial. But along with reflecting Krishna Consciousness,
it also affects my Krishna Consciousness. Affects means that, it, when I try to
speak about Krishna, that enlivens me. When people ask me questions, then I
think about the subject, I go deeper into subject, my own understanding
increases. So, my own understanding, my own realisation, my own purification
increases. So, the madhyama understands that Krishna Consciousness is not
just something that is in isolation done in the temple.

That I go to the temple, in front of the deity, and I chant, and you know, I, I
pray, and I worship the deity. That alone does not aff..., that does not al...,
alone is not my Krishna Consciousness. My Krishna Consciousness is reflected and
affected, by beh..., by behavior with the different kinds of people. And based
on this understanding, I behave appropriately so that my Krishna Consciousness
is protected and nourished. So, now, Srila Prabhupada, in his purport, gives
some interesting examples. He talks about firstly George Harrison. He does not
mention George Harrison by name, but he says that there is, there is famous
musician. And he chants Hare Krishna and he, he takes prasad. He invites devotees
to his place. He likes devotees. And he speaks about Krishna wherever he gets an
opportunity. So, Prabhupada says that, you know, we of..., we do not hesitate to
offer respect to such a person. So, Prabhupada is saying that he is at least in
the category of "kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta". He is chanting Krishna's
name and therefore, we do not hesitate to offer him respect.

So the point Srila Prabhupada is making is, he is making this whole verse
appreciable to the contemporary audience. So, he is saying that as sadhakas, we
should be able to respect anyone who chants the holy names. So, now, if we look
at George Harrison's life, you know, his de..., his devotion, that to Krishna
was definitely there. He loved to chant Hare Krishna. But he was not exactly a
single-pointed devotee in the sense that he was not committed to Prabhupada
alone. He was connected with many other spiritual teachers also. And several of
them were impersonalists. So, all of them combined to help him become attracted to
Vedic culture. And Prabhupada was well aware of his attractions to other
spiritual teachers. And, at, when Prabhupada would meet him, he would sometimes
ask also. So, Prabhupada, without criticising any other teachers, would just
present his message to them. And by presenting his message to them, you know,
this message of chanting the holy names and serving Krishna, he attracted those
people. He attracted George Harrison to him also.

So, now, the point is that, George Harrison may have had some other conceptions
also, of spirituality, you know, not just the pure devotional conception, but
Prabhupada did not see that. What Prabhupada saw is chanting the holy names.
That means "mana...", "manasādriyeta", should, should offer respects to such a
person. So, as sadhakas, we should be able to see the good in others. So,
people, generally speaking, unless they come to, you know, Krishna's lotus feet
properly, their conceptions are likely to be messed up. So, people may have,
people may, may chant Krishna's name, but that chanting of Krishna's name may be
mixed up with the chanting of some other demigod mantras. They may be uttering
some mantras, even to worship some semigods. Semigods is, Say me Gods. I am God.
So, those people who claim that I am God. And these people somehow, do not know
whether that is right or wrong. And they, they just avoid any complication. They
also chant the names of those self-made Gods.

So, at such times, we cannot leave all these people without mayavadis. So,
"kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta", "manasādriyeta", we offer respects in
the mind at least to them. Of course, we can offer obeisances also to them if
that is practical for us. But at least in the mind, we have to offer respect.
And beyond that, we also have to recognise that life itself is progressive. So,
those are kanistha can become madhyama later. You know, Srila Prabhupada also
refers to those who are initiated, but are not very serious practioners, as
kanistha. So, it is not that and we are going to get a label or label people.
This person is a kanistha. This person is a madhyama. This person is an uttama.
We cannot get like that. Nor we can put a label on ourselves. I am a madhyama.
"pranto bishca bhajanta mesa". Offer obeisances to me. Or not that a pure
devotee will say, uttama, you know, dandavat pranam, and "sudosaya", render
menial service to me. No, things do not work like that.

Any typology, any nomenclature that is there based on what classification,
purpose is, to translate that into reality is always a complex issue. So, the
focus is not on precisely categorising people in our mind and putting them into
pigeon holes. This is a kanistha. This is a madhyama. This is an uttama. No.
That is not our goal. This is for us to make spiritual advancement. And in
general, we can make out. That if somebody has been, has, he speaks very deeply
on the scriptures. He has been practicing for many decades, many years, many
decades. And he is devoted to Krishna. Then, accordingly, we understand that
that person is definitely not a kanistha. That person is a madhyama or uttama.
And we will offer our respects accordingly.

So, the important point is to recognise that there are different levels of
devotees, not to pigeon hole devotees in a certain categories. Somebody is a
madhyama, would be, but because I have a, I have a grudge against that person,
so I treat that person as a kanistha. No, these are objective criteria, and we,
we cannot subjectively decide that I do not like this person, so I assign a
lower catogery to him. In general, if somebody is new and chanting, we offer
"manasādriyeta". If somebody is initiated and worshipping the deity, then we may
not be able to practice right now "prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā". They may not exactly
be at that level, although they are trying for disrimination, among different
kinds of people, based on one's Krishna Consciousness. But even if they are not
doing that, still by worshipping, by, by sort of befriending them, and by
offering obeisances to them, one will make spiritual advancement.

So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur has written elaborately about these various adikaris.
And he says that, one of the characteristics of kanistha is that kanistha often,
if, even if that person becomes a worshiper of Krishna, that person becomes a
sort of fanatical worshiper, and offends the demigod. Yes, people are
worshipping demigods, stupid. So, now, ok, now, there should not be any
condemnation. There is a clear explanation of why demigod worship is for the
less intelligent people. And how more intellient people should give it up. But
beyond that, it is the decision of every individual. So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur
explains that even a bhakta should not disrespect the demigods. We do not
worship the demigods as independent Lords. We do not consider them supreme. But
that does not mean that we disrespect them. We offer them the proper respect as
representatives of Krishna, as exalted devotees. Although we may not worship
those specifically on altars.

Now, going beyond, let us look at here at the bottom, how, so we discussed this
about "prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā". And Prabhupada writes that the person who is
madhyama may have 30:40
