Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6d1YwmnlaM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=90WKsG0JhpoTuCXbgUWfJrDDBEJ8MTU0MDY1ODU0N0AxNTQwNTcyMTQ3&event=video_description&v=h6d1YwmnlaM&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_023_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Preface_and_overview_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Bhakti Sastri course, where we start with the Isopanisad.

Now that we have completed that Isopanisad, we will start with the Nectar of
Instruction or the Upadesamrita by Srila Rupa Goswami.

So let us recap what we have discussed what we discussed at the start of the
Isopanisad, about the importance of the four books. Essentially, in spiritual
life, we need to know sadhya and sadhana. Sadhya is the goal, that which is to
be achieved. That is ultimately Krishna.

        vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

And sadhana is the means, the process by which we are supposed to achieve that.
So if I want to go, I need to know where do I want to go? Ok, I want to go to
Delhi, I want to go to Mayapur. So, if I want to go to Mayapur, then the next
destination is fixed, then the process, am I going by train, or plane, or ship,
whatever.

So that is the sadhya and sadhana. Now, the sadhya and sadhana, they are
established through Bhagavad Gita and Isopanisad. That means how among the
various sadhyas, bhakti is the highest, how among the various sadhanas,
Bhagavan, Krishna is the highest. That is established through Bhagavad Gita and
Isopanisad.

And how they are to be practiced, how, further knowledge, how bhakti is to be
practiced, and who Krishna actually is, as a person, is talked about in the
Nectar of Devotion, Nectar of Instruction.

Now, of course, this division, like any other division, is not water-proof. Even
in the Bhagavad Gita, we do get directions about how to practice bhakti when
Krishna says:

        mac-citta mad-gata-prana

In 10.11, or 10.9 when he says that, or when he says:

        satatam kirtayanto mam

9.14. So there is this description also, but the systematic delineation of
bhakti, the details of how it should be practiced, the way it is given in the
Nectar of Devotion, Nectar of Instruction, it is not given in Bhagavad Gita.
Bhagavad Gita analyses various processes and then establishes the supremacy of
bhakti.

Nectar of Instruction, we will see, it does not talk, mention much about
ashtanga yoga, jnana yoga or karma yoga because that is not its focus. It
assumes that the seeker has accepted the point that bhakti is the best way, and
now, how is bhakti to be practiced.

Now, Nectar of Devotion will compare bhakti a little bit with other processes.
It will glorify the supremacy of bhakti in the beginning, and then immediately
will start off by explaining the details of bhakti, and then describing 64
qualities of Bhagavan also.

So sadhya and sadhana, how they are established through Bhagavad Gita and
Isopanisad. Now, they are established preliminary through Isopanisad. Isopanisad
we saw that, it moved from a universalis understanding of Ishvaras, the
controller of the universe, to a personalist understanding, as a person who has
a ace, and who bestows mercy and removes obstacles, and who can be called to at
the moment of death.

Now, the mood of approach in the Isopanisad, the last four verses, five verses
especially, last four mantras, fifteen to eighteen, they werre focusing on
prayers. That is essentially bhakti. So, the Isopanisad points towards Bhagavan
and bhakti, a personalist understanding and a prayerful attitude towards the
Absolute Truth. This will be elaborated further in the Bhagavad Gita. And we
will go to that gradually. Now we are focusing on the Nectar of Instruction
because it elaborates the process of bhakti, and it enables us to apply those
principles in our day-to-day life.

So, our process will be, first we will establish, then we will look at the
application. So, philosophical understanding through Isopanisad, then practical
applicatiion through Nectar of Instruction. Then again philosophical
understanding through Bhagavad Gita, and then practical appication through
Nectar of Devotion. That is the way we are going to take these four books.

And in the first two books, that means the Bhagavad Gita, so that means the
Isopanisad and the Nectar of Instruction, we will be focusing on the purports of
Srila Prabhupada, analysing them, categorising them, and then based on that, we
will be understanding Srila Prabhupada's mood and mission and how he wanted us
to practice Krishna Consciousness. When we come to Bhagavad Gita, because the
book is so big, we will not be able to go through detailing the purports, and
analysing the purports. We will be focusing more on the flow of the Gita and the
way that flow is understood through Srila Prabhupada's purports as well as the
previous acharyas' purports.

When we look at the Isopanisad, we will discuss a few, so when we look at the
Nectar of Instruction, we will also look at the few points which Bhaktivinoda
Thakur makes in his book Bhaktyaloka occasionally, Bhaktisiddanta Sarasvati
Thakur also wrote a commentary on the Nectar of Instruction, called Anutri
commentary, which Srila Prabhupada quotes quite frequently in his own purports.
We will look at that also, but our primary focus will be on the bhaktivedanta
purports. We discussed this approach at the start of the Isopanisad also. We
want to go systematically, so first we build our philosophical fundamentals by
understanding the mood that Srila Prabhupada wanted and the message that Srila
Prabhupada delivered. So, once we understand that, then we can look at what the
previous acharyas are also saying to supplement our understanding.

In the Nectar of Instruction, the essence is actually the practice of bhakti.
So, let us look at the themes in the Nectar of Instruction. There are various
themes which are all related with practical life. It talks about mind and sense
control, in the pratical, very important in the first three verses. Then it
talks about attitude, how we should have attitude in spiritual life and towards
devotees, and towards the process. Then, Srila Prabhupada also explains how
ISKCON is fulfilling the purpose of providing sadhu sangha. And ISKCON is also
providing, and ISKCON is basically a facility to apply Nectar of Instruction's
many instructions. Then, it talks also about the dynamic relationship between
guru and disciple, and very important aspect of the Nectar of Instruction is the
principle of sadhu sangha, the association of devotees, how we should associate
and how we should not associate with devotees. And when we talk about devotees,
not all devotees are at the same level, so devotees are on a hierarchy, some are
higher, some are lower. So, what are the different kinds of devotees? And how do
we know the kind of devotee that a particular person is? What is the behavior?
What are their qualifications?

And then based on that, we also talk further about bhakti. So, we understand
that devotees are at various levels, and what are the levels of devotion? That
will be more systematically elaborated in Nectar of Devotion, but here also it
is given. In bhakti, there is various stages of bhakti, and there is a gradual
development of bhakti. So, how all this happens will be the theme of Nectar of
Instruction.

So here is an overview of Nectar of Instruction from the point of view of the
nine stages of bhakti as explained by Srila Rupa Goswami, in his other book, the
Nectar of Devotion. So it is described that bhakti progresses in nine stages.
Shraddha is the first stage. When we come in the association of devotees, so
when we, preliminary inquisitive attitude, inqui... decide to investigate. Ok,
what is going on? What are these Hare Krishna? What is this Krishna business?
What is there beyond this life? What is the meaning and purpose of life? So,
Srila Prabhupada explains that this is basically a positive curiosity.

This is shraddha. And shraddha has to be expressed through action. When a person
has shraddha, at that time, a person does some things through that. So, if I
have faith, ok, I have a disease, I have to go to a doctor. And when I go to the
doctor, I talk with the doctor. So, that is talked about in the first stages.
So, we go and enquire. So, first three mantras basically talk about the
preliminaries which helps us to develop shraddha and which nourish shraddha.

Then after that, there is saddhu sangha. Saddhu sanghas mean the association of
devotees, "ado shraddha saddhu sangha", when we come in the association of
devotees, in that association, we learn to practice the process of devotional
service. So, this saddhu sangha is elaborate aspect of this process, of this
book, now, just as when we go to a doctor, and the doctor explains what is the
disease, we start taking the treatment.

So similarly, when there is saddhu sangha, after saddhu sangha comes bhajani
kriya, the practice of devotional service, which is like a spiritual treatment.
When we take a spiritual treatment, the next thing that happens is we start
getting cured. So especially, the prominent symptoms of sickness that are there,
they start subsiding.

So that is the stage of anartha nivritti. Anartha nivritti essentially means
that, nivritti means retirement, anartha is the undesirables, anartha, artha
means meaning, anartha means that has no meaning. Artha also means value or
money, and anartha means that which has no value, no money. So, our essential
desires based on lust, anger, greed, envy, pride and illusion, they have no
meaning and they have no value, but somehow, we assume that they have a lot of
meaning, and a lot of value. So anartha nivritti means that these, this
misconception of ascribing a meaning and value to that which is meaningless and
valueless, that stops, that this misconception retires from our consciousness.
And when the misconception retires, when we see how we are feeling and becoming
better by this, actually our faith increases. Just as when we take a treatment,
and the treatment cures us. Then, when we become cured by the treatment, we feel
that, oh, this is good. This treatment works. I want to take this treatment,
and become fully healthy.

So from, after anartha nivritti comes the stage of nistha. Nistha means the
faith has become very strong at that time. The faith has in fact become like a
banyan tree. At the stage of shraddha, the faith is like a banana tree. A banana
tree can be shaken, well, if it comes, it can just shake it and uproot it also.
But even if an elephant comes to a banyan tree, the elephant, it may put its
trunk around it, it may dash its head against it, and may try to pull with all
its strength, but the banyan tree is so deep rooted that it cannot be shaken. So
like that, we come to the stage of Nistha, when we do bhajani kriya and
experience anartha nivritti. So, this stage is also talked about in the seventh
verse, hinted at.

And then there is rucihi. Ruci means, so at that time, as we become spiritually
healthy, we start developing a taste for Krishna Consciousness. Right now, we
have a taste for worldly things, for sensual things. But we develop a taste for
spiritual things, for Krishna, and service to Krishna, and the paraphernalia
connected with Krishna at that stage. We may feel glimpses of the taste now
also. But that is, it is such a, it is far deeper and richer taste that we get
at ruci.

And from ruci comes asaktih. So, in asaktih, one goes much deeper and one is
getting a taste, but so the taste, when it develops, one gets attached, in
negative sense, when a person takes, when a person is given a free taste of
drugs initially. The person takes drugs, the person likes drugs, and then after
that, the person gets hooked to it, becomes attached to it, cannot sleep to it,
without it. That is in a negative sense, but similarly the positive sense,
when we get an experience of joy of the taste of devotion, then we become
attached, not just to devotion, but also to Krishna, the person around whom our
devotion is centered.

And after that comes bhava. Bhava is spiritual emotion. And it is just the
preliminary to prema, it is just, prema is just the next door, next stage.

So prema is the full development of love for Krishna, which is systematic, which
is comprehensive, which is all consuming of our being. So, it just fully floods
our heart with ocean of emotion, and then we feel that there is no need for us
to be attracted to anything worldly. And it is this stage of prema that the
devotees of Vrindavan live, the devotees in the spiritual world live. And this
stage of prema is our ultimate aspiration. And how do we come to this of prema?
By the steady practice of devotional service.

Now, Caitanya Mahaprabhu explains that, bhakti-lata-bija is like a creeper, it
is given by the spiritual master and then it has to be protected, protected in
two ways. One is that a fence has to be built so that no predators come and
damage or destroyed, and the second is that it has to be watered so that it will
grow. So, it has to be protected and nourished. And how it can be protected and
nourished? So that it will eventually grow and blossom, and give the fruit of
love of God, fruit of prema? That is what Nectar of Instruction talks about. So
in this way, Nectar of Instruction is a very important book which will guide us on
the path of devotion. Now let us look at the introduction of, the preface of
Nectar of Instruction, which Srila Prabhupada has given us. So in this preface,
Srila Prabhupada starts very strikingly. He explains that the Krishna
Consciousness movement is conducted under the supervision of Srila Rupa Goswami.

So this is a very deeply indicative of Srila Prabhupada's profound sense of
humility and connectedness with the acaryas and with the parampara. Srila
Prabhupada is not saying that this movement is conducted under my supervision.
He has started it for all practical purposes. Without him, there would have been
no Krishna Conscious movement in the west. And Srila Prabhupada was constantly
involved in preaching, guiding, overseeing and doing practically everything that
was necessary for the expansion of Krishna Consciousness movement. In the initial
days, he was a one-man army, and then later on, he was a commander of a fallible
army, many of his soldiers would fall, but he would go and raise them, and
inspire them again to fight and keep winning. And they won glorious victories,
the way the Krishna Concious movement spread just within eleven years all over
the world, has few parallels in world history, few at all for that matter if any
parallels. It is extraordinary.

But Srila Prabhupada is so humble here. He is saying that this is under the
supervision of Srila Rupa Goswami. Now, initially when Srila Prabhupada
published this book, the devotees saw that ok, this is meant for devotees, and they
published very limited run. When Srila Prabhupada came to know, he said no,
distribute it widely. Although it is meant for devotees, we want eventually the
whole world to become devotees. And even new people can learn about those books,
and they can benefit from it. So, Srila Prabhupada's vision was not just limited
that only a small number of people are devotees. He saw the whole world as
filled with potential devotees.

Now, Srila Prabhupada then explains who is Rupa Goswami. So we have to
understand that there is a progression in the Vedic revelation. So the Vedic
scriptures give us the Bhagavatam, where the highest truth about Krishna's
Supremacy is given. However, that truth was not widely propagated in the
intermediate period after the start of Kali Yuga. Now, other processes gained
more prominence. Karma kanda was there, and other refutation of Karma kanda,
Buddhism came up. Jainism came up. And then as a refutation of that
impersonalism, as propagated by Sankaracharya came up. Then, Vishishtadvaita, by
Ramanujacharya, and then dvaita by Madhavacharya came up. So like that, bhakti
was reestablished. But when Caitanya Mahaprabhu came, he established the
conclusion of the Vedic literature, of pure devotional service to Lord Sri
Krishna.

And once this conclusion was established, then that became central to our
understanding, to the subsequent understanding of the Vedic literature in the
Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, which Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started. So Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Krishna himself who has come again, and he has come to
reveal the essence of his descent as Krishna five thousand years ago. When
Krishna came, he revealed the Bhagavad Gita, and he revealed his wonderful
pastimes. But the way to access those pastimes is through Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
So when Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared, the Lord can do everything himself, but he
always asks his associates, he always, to play part, and he makes various of his
associates play role in this world.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got the six goswamis, who were prominent respectable
intelligent and charismatic individuals in different parts of the country. And
he got, in a sense, recruited all of them when he was traveling to various parts
of the country, and he got all of them to go to Vrindavan. And there he gave
them four missions. First was to build temples to glorify the pastimes of Radha
and Krishna. Second is to rediscover the lost places of the pastimes of Radha and
Krishna. Third is to write literature establishing the supremacy of devotional
service as the ultimate teaching of the Vedic literature. And fourth is to
examplify and teach the practice of pure devotional service. And the Goswamis
did all these four missions. So, the first two are in terms of, say, finding
places and building places, and second two is in terms of books.

So, Srila Prabhupada would often say that these are the prominent signs of
success within our movement, within the movement. He said if somebody builds a
temple, somebody writes a book. So he says, it is like a part of the material
world has been offered back to Krishna. When places made into a temple, then
the material world is spiritualised over there. So, that is a significant
definition of, significant sign of success. Then once Srila Prabhupada said
every time a book is published, I feel as if empire is one. Why? Because the
book is an empire of thought. Just like there can be an empire which spans in
space. Similarly, a book can be an empire of thought. And when that book is read
by people, then that book's wisdom attracts and conquers the people's heart. And
in this way, the empire expands within. And of course, both, the building of
the temples, and the building of, writing of books, both are meant ultimately to
attract people.

So the third success sign, Srila Prabhupada said, is how many people are
becoming devotees? So how many books are distributed, and how many temples are
built, and how many people are becoming devotees? These are the ways in which we
can tangibly measure the success of the spread of Krishna Consciousness. So, in
Vrindavan, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave the goswamis these two missions. One is
write books about Vaishnava Siddhanta and Vaishnava Sadachar. Vaishnava
Siddhanta is Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the conclusion
of all Vedic teachings. And pure devotional service to Krishna is the ultimate
message of the Vedic teachings. And then, how to practice pure devotional
service? Teach that through books. These are two kinds of books that he told
them to write. And he, and of course, when you teach devotional service,
examplify devotional service also. And then he also told them to build temples,
and also rediscover the lost places of the pastimes of Radha and Krishna. The
goswamis were important, critical representatives of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
desire for spreading Krishna Consciousness.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in his later part of his life, last eighteen years, he
stayed in Puri, and he basically relished pure love of Krishna over there, in
the association of his intimate devotees. Basically, there he demonstrated the
spiritual world and the love for Krishna, that floods in the devotees' hearts in
the spiritual world. But at the same time, Caitanya Mahaprabhu had a mission.
And that was to share Krishna Consciousness with everyone else. So who is going
to do that? That was done primarily by the goswamis. The goswamis not only
preached to the various scholars who were in the Vrindavan area, but along with,
they laid the foundations for future generations of preaching. They especially
wrote book and through the writing of books, they systematised the teachings of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

All the books written by the other associates of Caitanya Mahaprabhu are mostly
pastime books. We had the bengali associates of Caitanya Mahaprabhu who wrote
pastime books. And those books are important, no doubt, but they do not
establish Siddhanta of that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave so thoroughly. Caitanya
Bhagavad, Caitanya Mangal, Caitanya Candrodaya Nataka, Caitanya Carit, these are
books written by Vrindavan Das Thakur, Lochana Das Thakur, Kavi Karanapura,
Murari Gupta. Now, these are very important books, but they focus primarily on
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes.

So what were Caitanya Mahaprabhu's teachings? They do not come so systematically
in those books. Therefore, those were, that was the role of the six Goswamis of
Vrindavan. They wrote the philosophical teachings and they established teachings
in a very systematic way, and then the two literary heritages, the bengali
literary heritage of pastimes, and the Vrindavan literary heritage of philosophy,
that was integrated into one book, the magnum opus of Krisna Das Kaviraja
Goswami. That was Caitanya Caritamrta.
