Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SFhd4DDMlXA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_038_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_8_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=sol5MbQza5zc1F_hdh0jfBKO0G58MTU0MTgzMDgxM0AxNTQxNzQ0NDEz&v=SFhd4DDMlXA&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction. Today, now, we are entering deep into
the heart of Gaudiya Vaishnava teachings, where we will discuss about the
reside, residence in the holy dham and complete absorption in the advanced
teachings of devotion. So let us look at the verse and then we will move forward
and look at the purport.

        tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-
        smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya
        tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī
        kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

So, "tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-", that "tan-nāma", that Absolute Truth,
that Lord Krishna, he, his name, form, and character, one engages oneself in
"sukīrtanānu", nicely engaging oneself in doing glorification of that. And
"smṛtyoḥ", so "ānu-smṛtyoḥ" refers to systematically cultivating the
remembrance. And "krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya", so "krameṇa" means
progressively. One engages one's tongue and one engages one's mind, "niyojya"
engaging. And how should one do? "tiṣṭhan vraje", One situates oneself in
Vrindavan dham. "tad-anurāgi", "tad-anurāgi" means those who are having "anurāg"
for Lord Krishna, those are attached to Lord Krishna. "tad-anurāgi-janā", so
those people, those devotees, exalted devotees, who are attached to Lord
Krishna. "ānugāmī", one becomes their followers. And in this way, "kālaṁ nayed
akhilam", one should spend all of one's time, absorbed in engaging one's mind,
and one's tongue in the service in Krishna. "ity upadeśa-sāram", this is the
essence of all advice.

So, in essence, this verse completes the Upades of Upadesamrta. After this,
in, afterwards, it is almost like a, there is a fo..., follow shruti, not so
much sruti, but g..., the glorification of Vraja. So, it just talks about how
fortunate one is who can stay in Vraja. And then, it talks about Govardhan and
Radhakund, of, Vrindavan, Govardhan, Radhakund. We should discuss in future
classes. But the Upadesa of Upadesamrta more or less ends with this verse. And
that is why "upadeśa-sāram", the essence of all advices set to be this. So, let
us look at Srila Prabhupada's translation.

"The essence of all advice is that one should utilize one's full time -
twenty-four hours a day - in nicely chanting and remembering the Lord's divine
name, transcendental form, qualities and eternal pastimes, thereby gradually
engaging one's tongue and mind. In this way, one should reside in Vraja [Goloka
Vrndavan Dhama] and serve Krsna under the guidance of devotees. One should
follow in the footsteps of the Lord's beloved devotees, who are deeply attached
to his devotional sevice."

So, the essence of all advice, "upadeśa-sāram" translates that as full-time
engagement, twenty-four hours a day in devotional service, following in the
footsteps of a great Vrajavasi in Vrindavan. So, let us look at what Srila
Prabhupada says in his purport. So, he starts with the basics for us and helps
us move forward from those basics. So, first point, Srila Prabhupada starts
this purport is, he focuses "krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya", so "manasī", he
takes, he focuses a lot on the mind, and he explains that what do we have to do?
We have to train the mind. So if, thereby, there are two aspects to the
training. Why to train and how to train? And in the purport, Srila Prabhupaa
mentions that, the Krishna Consciousness movement is especially meant to train
the mind. So, this is a radical statement if we think about it. This does not
come in one of the seven purposes of ISKCON that we want to train the mind of
people. But then, whatever is to be achieved, whatever are the purposes of
ISKCON, to help, to recei..., teach people about God sys..., Krishna
systematically, to distribute literature, to erect a place for dedicated
transcendental pastimes of the Lord, to bring people together through a simple
life which is centered more on God.

So all that actually involves changing the way people think. And that is
training of the mind. So, the primary pro..., contribution to Krishna
Consciousness movement is not humanitarian. It is not, offering, say, food
relief, although that also, devotees do it through the ISKCON food relief
programme. But primarily, the focus is to train the mind. And the training of
the mind is what yoga is essentially supposed to do. When you say, yoga means to
connect, to connect the soul with Krishna. Now, how is the connection done? It
is not a physical connection that we use revets and screws to tighten. It is a
connection which is based on a reorientation of the mind. The mind is
disconne..., mind wants to stay disconnected from Krishna because it is
attracted to material things. But training the mind means that we get the mind
to again become connected with Krishna. And when we connect, we get to, get the
mind to become inclined to Krishna, attracted to Krishna, and once we are
attracted to Krishna, then naturally, the perfection of yoga is attained because
we will be able to connect ourselves with Krishna, Krish... So, 7.1, Krishna
also says:

        mayy asakta-manah partha
        yogam yunjan mad-asrayah

So, the purpose of yoga mentioned, the purpose of practicing yoga is "mayy
asakta-manah", to get the mind to become attached to Krishna. So, Srila
Prabhupada's purport focuses on the mind. And the special purpose of the Krishna
Consciousness is movement is to train mind. So, we can divide the purport in two
parts, why to train and how to train. So, we will focus largely on why to train
and we will discuss briefly about the, when we sp..., when Prabhupada talks
about training here, he talks a lot about, training at the advanced levels of
devotion, which we will discuss briefly, but we will also discuss at a practical
level, at our stage in spiritual advancement, what we can do to train the mind. 

So, why do we train? The first point is, Prabhupada explains that the mind can
be a friend or our enemy. So, because the mind can act in both ways, if we
want our own good, then we need to train the mind so that it will act as a
friend. Otherwise, the mind will make us do things which will lead to our own
ruination. So, many people often talk about their own demons. You know, some
sport star who has a lot of talent and lot of potential, but somehow at the key
movements chokes. That means he becomes nervous and he is not able to perform
right at the key movements. The sport star may say that, you know, I have a lot
of demons and the demons are tormenting me. Now, they are, they, they do not
really think, they are in terms of demons when they say, some creatures with
horns coming out of their head and teeth coming out of their mouth. They are,
they basically say that there is something within me, which is dragging me down.
What is that something? So, that something is actually the mind. And the anartha
is infecting the mind. So, the mind can often act as our enemy.

And why does it act as our enemy? It is because of the past impressions of
material enjoyment, that are impressed within it, and the mind has got
infatuated by those enjoyments. And then, not the just the enjo..., ex...,
experiences of enjoyment, but the experiences of trouble, of the experiences of
anxiety which make a person become very overwhelmingly emotional. So,
essentially, we can say that, the mind is affected by the modes. That the person is
too conditioned by the lower modes, then choking under pressure, or succumbing
to temptation. That will be more relevant to devotees. So the, all this,
self-defeating emotions that come up and sometimes overcome us, they all come
because the mind is infected by the lower modes, passion, ignorance.

So, what do we do? We have to get rid of those impressions. So, Prabhupada says
that the mind has many impressions. Sometimes, those impressions just come up.
And those impressions come up and one can get mislead in wrong directions. So,
we will see in our spiritual life as sadhakas that the temptations can overpower
us in two ways. One is that externally, a temptation, tempting object comes,
and it is so attractive that we get attracted to it and we may fall for it. The
other is that internally, suddenly, desires come up. And when the desires come
up, they catch us so strongly that although we want to resist:

        anicchann api varsneya
        balad iva niyojitah

Arjuna describes the subjective feeling of a seeker, o..., or of a tra...,
aspiring transcendentalist that at that time, it is, seeker is having a conflict
within the heart, and the seeker does not want to succumb, but still as if
against one's desires, one is engaged in sin. "balad iva niyojitah", so the past
impression overwhelm us. Now, of course, we can fight back, and we can resist,
but at certain times, the impression is so overwhelming that it is almost
impossible to resist it.

So, why does it happen and what can we deal with, how can we deal with it? So,
it happens because there is deep within, un..., in the s..., in the mind, there
are impression of our past indulgences. And just as sometimes deep within the
water, fomentation happens and then because of some chemical process,
fomentation or whatever, then the, suddenly, bubbles start coming up on the
surface. So, it is like that. There are desires deep in our mind and sometimes,
they suddenly come up. And when those impression come, they can be very contrary
to our moral and spiritual values. And they can impell us to act traumally.
That is why Prabhupada says that it can make, create a dangerous situation. And
ultimately, what we think of at the time of death is going to determine where we
will go. This is called as a law of last thought. And:

        yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
        tyajaty ante kalevaram

Whatever we think of at the time of death, that is what we attain. So, if at the
time of death, we suddenly think of something which is undesirable, then we may
go..., end up in auspicious destination. Of course, the mind, generally, at the
time of death, thinks of that object in which we got the greatest shelter during
our lifetime, custodian time. Death is a time of great devastation, great fear.
So, when there is devastation, fear, one instinctively reaches for shelter.
Where will one get the shelter? That varies according to person to person. But
whatever a person has experienced shelter in throughout one's life, that is what
the mind will go to instinctively at the time of death. So, if we have
cultivated practicing Krishna Consciousness throughout our life, then the mind
will go towards Krishna Consciousness. Otherwise, the mind will go in vain,
wrong directions.

So, how can the mind act as our enemy? Let us discuss that briefly over here.
So before we can seriously impell ourselves to train the mind. See, we need
conviction and we need commitment, we discussed in our previous class, to go
free from material pleasure to spiritual pleasure. So, conviction is required,
the mind is a..., can act as my enemy. The mind frequently acts as my enemy.
Therefore, I need to deal with the mind properly. So, to understand how the mind
may act as an enemy, we look at acronym, MIND. We discussed four ways in which
the mind can act in inimical ways.

So, look at the mind before you look with mind. So, treat the mind as a separate
person. And look at the mind before look with the mind. What this means is, we
will look at the acronym a little later. Let us look at the title over there.
This is, actually, a top title of a book which I hope to write in future. So,
look at the mind. So, basically this means treat the mind as a separate person.
And now for example, if I am speaking right now. So, you look at me and then
you evaluate, what is this person saying? Does this person's statement make
sense? You know, if I am saying, look at that direction, and normally if we know
that person, if we trust that person, we may understand to look in that
direction. But if we are driving a car, and there is a neighborhood, oh, look in
that, the, that person is sitting next to us in the side, say, hey, look over there.
Now, even if we trust that person, still, if I am at, at holding a steering
wheel, I just cannot look here and there. I have to look ahead. Then, I will, I
will think, I will look ahead at the road, and then afterwards cautiously, I
will look in that direction. And then if I do not know the person, if I am
driving a, if I am driving a, say a bus, and suddenly a person says, hey, look
there. Somebody just comes along. I do not know that person. Then, if I am doing
something important, I will, I will not really look at that thing. I will first
look at that person. Is this person trustworthy? Is this person, is it worth it
to listen to this person and look at that, whatever that person is saying?

So, like that, you know, when we hear per things from a particular person, like
and the person tells us to do something, first, we look at that person, e..,
c..., evaluate the credibility of that person, and then decide whether we should
do what the person is suggesting. So, similarly, look at the mind before you
look with the mind means when the mind speaks something, at that time, we
evaluate the credibility of the mind. Is this what it is saying making sense?
And the mind often speaks lies in four major ways. So, if we have to understand
which are the ways in which the mind can mislead us, so for that purpose, we
need to look at the mind carefully. So, by understanding, ok, these are the
kind of l..., lies that the mind speaks, then when the mind is speaking
something, then we can ela.., evaluate. Is it falling in these categories? It is
falling in these categories, then I hold, listen to it, then I will be cautious.
And I will evaluate whether it is lying right now. And then if it is lying, then
I will not listen. Otherwise, I can do what the mind is saying. So, let us look
at these four categories and then we will understand how the mind can trick us.
You know, not just in spiritual life, the mind troubles and tricks even in
material life.

In material life, as I said, a person who is a sport star, and can, I hit
the winning stroke at the last, in the final stages, has the capacity, has the
talent. But then if the person chokes, the mind, what is it, mind just
overwhelms the person with so much tension, so much anxiety, so much pressure
that the person chokes. And the person is not able to do at that time. 16:14
