Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yadqCnGfjV0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=yadqCnGfjV0&redir_token=T8ByUpjuo5YUPFf28lhDuiK8HUd8MTU0MTgzMDg3MEAxNTQxNzQ0NDcw&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_040_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_10_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to Bhakti Sastri, Nectar of Instruction.

Today, we will be discussing the tenth verse. So, this verse talks about the
hierarchy of various levels of people. Previous verse was about various levels
of places. Now, among the various levels of people, we will start right from the
sinful materialist to the topmost of all devotees, Radharani. So, the scope of
this verse is breathtaking. Let us look at the verse:

        karmibhyaḥ parito hareḥ priyatayā vyaktiṁ yayur jñāninas
        tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ premaika-niṣṭhās tataḥ
        tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-paṅkaja-dṛśas tābhyo ’pi sā rādhikā
        preṣṭhā tadvad iyaṁ tadīya-sarasī tāṁ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī

So, "karmibhyaḥ", better than "karmibhyaḥ parito", than the karpi, karmis then
in all respects. "hareḥ priyatayā", they have been pur..., favored by Lord Hari.
Who are those people, "vyaktiṁ", those people, "yayur", "vyaktiṁ yayur" as it is
mentioned in the sastras. "vyaktiṁ yayur jñāninas", the jnani people, so better
than the karmis are the jnanis.

"tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ", now, beyond that, greater than that are
those who are v..., liberated by knowledge, "jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ", and
they have become engaged in devotional service. So better jnanis are devotees.
Then, "premaika-niṣṭhās tataḥ", and among the devotees, those who have actually
developed the love for Krishna, "prema", they are better.

"tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-paṅkaja-dṛśas", so "paśu-pāla", Krishna is called as
gopal, similarly "paśu-pāla", he was taking care of the animals.
"paṅkaja-dṛśas", so the Lord who is the protector of the, you know, cows. So the
gopis, they are lotus eeyes, and they are the beloved of that "paśu-pāla".
"tābhyo ’pi sā rādhikā", so that means about the devotees who have attained love
of God, are the gopis. And among them, about them, the highest is Radhika.

"preṣṭhā tadvad iyaṁ tadīya", and very dear to her, "tadīya-sarasī", her lake.
"tāṁ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī", who is there, who will not take shelter of that lake of
Radhakund. Who is that person? "kaḥ kṛtī", that fortunate person. "su-kṛtī",
"kṛtī" means one who has done good work, one who is fortunate.

Let us look at the translation:

"In the sastra it is said of all types of fruitive workers, he who is advanced
in knowledge of the higher values of life is favored by the Supreme Lord Hari.
Our of many such people who are advanced in knowledge [jnanis], one who is
practically liberated by virtue of his knowledge may take to devotional service.
He is superior to the others. However, one who has actually attained prema, pure
love of Krishna, is superior to him. The gopis are exalted above all devotees
because they are always totally dependent upon Sri Krsna, the transcendental
cowherd boy. Among the gopis, Srimati Radharani is the most dear to Krsna. Her
kunda [lake] is as profoundly dear to Lord Krsna as this most beloved of the
gopis. Who, then, will not reside at Radha-kunda and, in a spiritual body
surcharged with ecstatic devotional feelings [aprakrtabhava], render loving
service to the divine couple Sri Sri Radha-Govinda, who perform Their
astakaliya-lila, Their eternal eightfold daily pastimes. Indeed those who
execute devotional service on the banks of Radha-kunda are the most fortunate
people in the universe."

So, here, we see the hierarchy 04:18
