Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWtABv9LJhQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_033_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_4_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=ASuULIULR7lagevDsLZ4BDDIVAx8MTU0MTgzMDY1NkAxNTQxNzQ0MjU2&event=video_description&v=OWtABv9LJhQ

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction. We are discussing text four, and
among the six elements of text four, "dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", and "bhuṅkte
bhojayate caiva", these are the four that we have discussed. Now, we will
discuss "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati". that we, how we reveal our heart in
confidence and share our heart with confidence.

This is actually one of the most important aspects of devotional service. And
ths will determine whether we will have deep relationships or superficial
relationships. So, we will discuss what it means to share our heart in
confidence. The sharing of the heart can be at multiple levels. At the level of
pure devotional service, at very advanced level of devotional service, both the
devotees' hearts are wedded to Krishna. And naturally they talk about Krishna.

So, we see this, you know, for example in the Caitanya Cairtamrta, when Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu would be with his intimate associates, Swarup Damodar
Goswami and Ramananda Ray. These were his two most intimate associates in the,
in the Gambhira, that was his place, in Jagannath Puri. And they would discuss
very confidential pastimes of Krishna. And they would sing verses, recite verses
on the Bhagavatam, sing songs and Caitanya Mahaprabhu would be in ecstasy.

So, this is a very intimate sharing of the heart. And that is the ultimate goal
of all devotees. If you want to:

        mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā
        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ
        tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

That:

        bodhayantaḥ parasparam
        kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ

That we talk to each other about Krishna, and in that, we relish the supreme
happiness. In fact, it is said in the Bhagavatam that "parasparam kathayantaś",
that the joy of discussing Krishna Katha with every intimate devotee, it is the
highest pleasure that two human beings can have. At a material level, two people
come together, the highest pleasure that they can have is the pleasure of
ordinary relationship, sex. But higher than that is the pleasure when two human
beings come together as devotees, and discuss intimately about the common object
of their love. It is Krishna.

So, this is what we aspire for. Now, like-minded devotees come together, and
very intimately discuss about Krishna. So, we see this again and again in the
Caitanya Caritamrta. Isvara Puri did this kind of service for Madhavendra Puri,
not only did he take care of his body, but also he very intimately served his
spiritual master by speaking about Krishna at tho..., in his final days. So,
that is at the highest level, where in my heart, Krishna is there, and another
heart, another devotee's heart, Krishna is there, both of us come together, we
intimately discuss Krishna.

So, this is also what we do when we come together officially in classes. But it
may not be so much that in my heart Krishna is there. It may be that Krishna is
primarily in my head, little bit in my heart also. And in the case of the
audience also, little bit in their head, little, little bit in their heart. And
we try to intellectually understand, and relate, and try to develop our
relationship with Krishna in whatever way we can.

So, that is also quite nourishing for the heart. Because we are discussing about
Krishna. Anything centered on Krishna is good. So, at one level is, two devotees
discussing Krishna intimately. At another level is, two devotees discussing
their service to Krishna. So, the two are not necessarily different, but in some
cases, do, they do become different.

Now, for example Draupadi, and the queens of Dwarka, when they met together.
Then the queens of Dwarka asked Draupadi. You know, how do you serve your
husbands? You know, you have, you are one wife and you have five husbands. You
know, we are, we are so many and we all have to serve one husband. So we are in
a different predicament, but our service is the same. Please tell us how do you
serve. And then in Mahabharat, it is described, Draupadi tells, you know, how
she is the first to wake, she is last to rest, and she never ea..., she serves
all her husbands dutifully, she ensures that they all take food before she
takes. And she gives a lot of variety of ways in which she serves. And seeing
the sincerity with which she serves her husbands, all the queens of Dwarka, they
are very im..., impressed and inspired.

Now, in a sense, we could say in the hierarchy, Dwarka wasis are higher than
Hastinapur wasis. Dwarka wasis are considered more intimate associates. Dwarka
is a part of the spiritual world directly. So, but they have no hot inners that
we are superior to you. When they come together, they learn from each other how
can we serve better. So, similarly, when two devotees come together, then they
can learn, they can talk about their services. For example, there are two book
distributors who come together, and they share their experiences. Oh, you know,
while we were book distrbuting, we did like this, we did like this. This is
what happened. Or two people who have constructed temples in different places,
they come together. So service brings us together.

And then, because of services are inherent to Krishna, the talks are also
connected with Krishna, they focus on service to Krishna. So, now, Srila
Prabhupada would often say, when he would discuss about Krishna Conciousness, he
would either talk philosophy or many disciples would come to talk about the
services. You know, his, his way of interacting with his disciples when you, if
we see when he goes on morning walks, most of his morning walks, he would be
talking philosophy. And the morning walks emerged spontaneously. They emerged
spontaneously means that one day Srila Prabhupada said I want to go on morning
walk, those who want can come with me. And when they started going, they found
that Prabhupada was in a different mood, quite relaxed, observing nature, and
making some comments based on nature. And the devotees, they started seeing the
whole world with new eyes because of Prabhupada's Krishna Consciousness.

And this became among the most loved of all of Prabhupada's events. Now,
Prabhupada's classes were there when he was the acharya speaking formally. Srila
Prabhupada was the acharya even when he wanted to go on a morning walk, but the
mood was more intimate, more sweeter, Srila Prabhupada was equally intructive,
but much more relaxed, much more approachable in a sense. Devotees coud ask him
questions, and he would answer. And he would look at nature and by, from obvious
facts, he would derive extraordinary insights. And, so that was Srila Prabhupada
talking in the first level. "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati". Prabhupada was showing
the devotees, Krishna, in nature, in the world, in the things that we day to day
see, but we do not see their Krishna connection.

Then Srila Prabhupada, when devotees would come, when devotees put their
service, and he would ask them, and he would guide them, he would say. Now,
devotees are going to say "prasya", and preaching, and they are trying to do
something. And Srila Prabhupada would say, ok, do this, do not do this. And
devotees, share the problems. And Prabhupada would respond to them. And
Prabhupada was as a manager. He was thunder, especially in India. He was right
on the f..., ground. He was, head was in Goloka Vrindavan. His heart was in
Goloka Vrindavan. But when Srila Prabhupada was taking of the affairs of ISKCON,
his hea..., his feet were firmly on the ground. And he was aware who was
cheating. Who was competent. Who was not competent. And his, Srila Prabhupada
has enormous trust in his disciples. At the same time was aware, that they were
unexperienced, and they could be, you know, fleeced by the Indians who would
take ten ti..., sometimes ten ti..., fives times more amount of which they
would normally get from other Indians. We, just because these people were
foreigners.

So, the point was, Srila Prabhupada would instruct devotees in service. You
know, the first days, when Srila Prabhupada started having, started receiving
guests. You know, Prabhupada would himself be on the ground. And when the bed
had to be laid. The cushions had to be laid. Prabhupada would him..., himself by
force, crumpling out the, removing all the crumples in the sheet. And showing
devotees how things should be set up for receiving it. Prabhupada would teach
his discples how to clean using a broom, and a mat, and a cloth, and a gloom, a
cloth, and Prabhupada would talk with devotees.

So, these were the moments when Srila Prabhupada brought Krishna alive in the
laboratory of the world for his disciples. He showed them that talking about
Krishna and working for Krishna is own not just only theoretical, something
practical. Some devotees would go to ask Srila Prabhupada for money. And the
way he would look in his pocket, early days, Prabhupada himself was the, like
the president of the temple, the commander of the temple, the treasurer of the
temple, and the counselor of the temple. Prabhupada was everything at that time,
the early days.

So, if somebody wanted money, they would go directly to Prabhupada. We are
talking about 1966-67. So, Srila Prabhupada, even when he would take out a
coin, you know, his ha..., hand would move like, it was for me an artistic
dance, you know. Gracefully, take out of coin, and normally a person take a coin,
toss it out. But Prabhupada would gracefully take it out. Mainly, he was handling
lakshmi, and he handed to the disciples. So, through all this, the devotees'
hearts could move closer and closer to Krishna.

So there can be "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati" with respect to services. When George
Harrison came to Srila Prabhupada, you know, one time, he asked, do you want me
to shave and join like everybody else? And Prabhupada said, no, you have been
given the talent to sing and you, and to compose music. You sing about Krishna.
And the whole world will be defeated by that. And he did that. And initially, he
became very popular, and later on, you know, when he tried to do a little bit
too much, from the public perception, too much, he tried to get people to chant
Hare Krishna, then the reaction was not very receptive. You know, he got
negative results for his songs, that people chipped, because, people did not
like it. Because when somebody becomes very big, you know, they have become big
because they are providing sense gratification to people. And suddenly, from
that top spot, somebody starts pro..., providing something else. So, they are
trying, trying to give Krishna. They can do it, but up to a particular limit.

People want them to fit in a particular mood. So then, he went fo..., he went
back and met Srila Prabhupada. This is not described in lilamrta. This actually,
it can come other books as an autobiography of George Harrison, called "Here
comes the Sun". So, that is written by Joshua Greene, from a Prabhupada
disciple, Yogeshwar Prabhu. So, there, he describes how he went and met Srila
Prabhupada, and he has belt his heart with, for Prabhupada. He said, Prabhupada,
as if, I feel as if, instead of bringing people to Krishna, I am causing people
to go away from Krishna. And I am losing people, losing my friends also. He says
I am taking one step forward, then I am feeling that I am taking ten steps
behind.

So, what should I do? And Prabhupada understood this. He said, we need an
eternal dilemma. You know, when a person tries to move towards God, often that
person needs to move away from the world. So, at that time, Prabhupada looked at
him sympathetically. And He said, Prabhupada told him, do not overdo it. Basically,
he said that, you know, do, you do whatever you can within your position. Do not
disturb yourself. And then after, certain, the, at that time, Prabhupada almost,
George Harrison, almost every song has been given to Krishna, but then after
that he toned down a little bit. And there again, his popularity went up.

So, Prabhupada was expert about how to guide somebody who was a pure devotee,
somebody who was aspiring for directly pure devotional service, serious
devotees, Prabhupada told him, Prabhupada told him, you know, just sing Hare
Krishna. We do not, we are not considered with musical styles, too much. We want
to have good music, but our goal is not to become musicians. Our goal is to be
singers for Krishna's pleasure. But somebody is a professional musician,
Prabhupada would instruct differently. So this is "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati".
When a devotee comes, now, we are coming from the second to the third part.

Second part is related with our ser..., service. Third is related with our own
challenges, our anarthas, our problems. And this actually is the most
challenging that we need help in fighting our private battles. "guhyam ākhyāti
pṛcchati". So, at one level, ultimately, we all have a relationship with
Krishna. But Krishna right now is not very easily accessible to us from within
our hearts. So, what do we do? We have to access Krishna in other ways. What are
those other ways? We have to access Krishna through guru-sadhu-sastra. And the
more we access Krishna through guru-sadhu-sastra, we follow those instructions
and by that, gradually, we start coming closer and closer to Krishna internally
also. So, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport, about how we need to practice
Krishna Consciousness in the association of devotees.

So, this is, the movement of ISKCON has been created for the sake of nourishing
the six full exchanges between devotees. So, devotees are not just meant to be
physically together in the movement. But they are alo meant to emotionally come
close to each other and closer to Krishna. That is one of the purposes among the
purposes of ISKCON. Srila Prabhupada said, so that being the case, how exactly
can this be implemented in our life? So when I have some anarthas, I, I feel
myself overcome by lust, or anger, or greed, or pride, or envy, or illusion,
then at such a time, what do I do? So in general, we may get guidance from
classes, we may hear something from senior devotees, and we can apply that and
try to learn, but there are times when that challenge becomes too much. And we
are fighting alone, and we feel overcome.

So at that time, we have to go and talk with some trustworthy senior devotee,
ideally if we have a counselor, with our counselor we discuss. And we get some
intimate guidance and by that, we learn. So, the most important thing here is
that, this sort of "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", variantly mean a very intimate
devotee. If we do not have an intimate devotee, then we cannot share this. And
even if there is an intimate devotee, that devotee also has to be trustworthy.
Now, what we speak in the privacy of our closed room with that devotee, if that
goes broadcast with the world, then it can terribly embarrass us. And, you know,
we are certainly not pure devotees that we will not care for embarrassment. And
it is not just our embarrassment and our ego are getting hurt. In principle, if
something is spoken in private, it should not be spoken to others.

So, in many counseling sessions, you know, that is, the counselor is almost like
sworn to a code of secrecy. That what, the counseling, counselor, counselee
will be open, will to open up, only when the counselor maintains privacy. If the
counselor does not maintain privacy, then, the counselee cannot open up. So, in
general, when a devotee speaks, if we have to speak to some senior devotees.
Say, if there is a counselee and there is a counselor. If there is a person who
is being guided, and there is a guide. So, what they speak, that should never be
spoken to others. It has to be spoken, generally, it should be with the consent
of the subordinate, unless of course, if the issue is so serious, that involves
something, which involves breaking the, breaking the law of the state, and it
involves legal complications, then immediately, we may have to alert higher
authority. Or, if it involves other serious consequences. But it, everything has
to be done very cautiously, respectfully, and sensitively. So, how do we go
about this?

You know, we cannot expect this "guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati", you know, it does not
first of all mean that, you know. We all come with our own baggage. And none of
us is problem free. All of us have had anarthas. Sometimes, when we see some
senior devotees, you know, they are happily chanting, dancing, singing, we start
thinking as if, you know, they are always like this, but nobody actually fell
from their mother's womb with a tilak on their head and a bead bag in their
hands. You know, everybody was born in the material world. And everybody has
their conditionings. And those conditionings actually create challenges for all
of us. Everyone has their challenges. And while we face those challenges, it is
important for us to know that things have to forward step by step by step. So
what does it mean move forward step by step?

That means that the relationships develop also as we are going along. Like when
two warriors go on a battle field together, two soldiers go together, two
generals go together, say, you know, they may not know each other so well, but
when they are facing the enemy bullets together. Then at that time, they
understand, I have to watch your back, you have to watch my back. You know, so,
actually, there is anecdote that when the American war for independence was
going on, it is, you know, they were a sm..., the Americans were a small group
of people, relatively speaking, as com..., they did not have much weapons, they
just scattered, and then the British army was there. So, fighting against them
was for them very difficult.

So, at that time, one of the American leaders, he made a speech, and he said
something which applies to us in devotee association also. He said all of us
have to hang together or we will all hung together. That means what? All of us
have to hang together. That we have to stay together with each other and we
have to fight, unitedly. Otherwise, if we all become separated, then all of us
will be individually shot down, or we will be arrested and then all of us will
hung together. That means we will be convicted and we will all hung. So, that is
true for all of us also. All of us have to hang together or we will hung
together.

So, what eventually, what will happen is if we do not have intimate relationship
with devotees, we do not share our heart, then one by one by one, everybody will
fall because internally we cannot keep fighting against the mind forever without
sometime or other getting discouraged by the fight. Because we start wondering,
how can I keep fighting like this? How long? How long? So, when that happens,
then when we start getting discouraged, at that time, we need someone to
encourage us. So, the mind can create so many illusions. When Sita was abducted
by Ravana. Ravana tried to win her over first by temptation. He took her and he
showed her his full palace, you know, those extraordinary opulent. The he showed
her puspak. And he was hoping that a woman, that as woman, when she sees such
opulence there. And he told her, you can be my chief queen. And all my other
queens will be your maid servants. He thought she will get allured by this. But
she did not pay any attention to that.

So, first he tried temptation. That did not work. Then, she, he tried threats.
He told, you know, if you do not accept me, then I will have you cooked for my
breakfast. And I will eat you up. And he told, there were, ugly-looking,
monstrous practically speaking, who were guarding Sita over there, and they were
20:20
