Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FdIl3IpWP64
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=FdIl3IpWP64&event=video_description&redir_token=RAVzuyvUhK0IhgzGOAglCTFUDT98MTU0MDY1ODY1NEAxNTQwNTcyMjU0&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_025_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_1_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Nectar of Instruction. We are discussing the first, second verse
now. The first verse we will complete and then we will go to the second verse
if possible today.

The first verse, what we are discussing is the six vegas.

        vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ
        jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam
        etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ
        sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt

So, we were discussing first about atonement. There is a direct method, there is
a, the traditional method of cultivation of qualities for purification. And then
there is the pancaratra method, the devotional method, centered on practicing
bhakti yoga. And in that, we discussed about "vaco", "manasah", and
"krodha-vegan", based on Srila Prabhupada's commentary. We will complete that,
the remaining three vegas, and then we will look at what Srila Prabhupada says
based on Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur's commentary. Let us look at the PPT
here.

So we have "jihva" and "Udaro Pastha" vega. So in "jihva" vega, the urge of the
tongue. Now this is to eat. "vaco vegam" refers to the urge of the tongue to
speak. Now "jihva vegam", Srila Prabhupada says that actually people are
controlled by their tongue and they are running here and there becauase of that.
So people are forced to eat in non-devotee shops. Even devotees, and the
solution is prasad. And then, the solution has two parts, be grateful when
Krishna supplies, accept as mercy, and take at scheduled times. Let us look at
this a little bit more in detail.

Now, today, many people are committing suicide with their tongue. The way they
are eating, they are inviting that, not just in terms of the kinds of food that
they eat. That is definitely there, but also the quantites of food that they
eat.

As an old egyptian probably (?, 02:23) says that, now you live on one third what
you eat, the remaining two third lives your physician. So this is all the more
true in today's society, where obesity is fast becoming one of the most
widespread causes of avoidable disease, disease, not just, disease, but even
death. So this, of course, is a combination jihva and udar vega. Srila
Prabhupada does not talk too much about udar vega. The two are connected. So
what is the essential difference?

Jihva vega refers to the taste. You know, we want to eat a lot of variety of
objects that are delicious. And udar vega refers to the quantity. Now, we want
to eat it more than what we, our body needs. So, of course, where the is desire
to eat variety of food stuffs, then that jihva vega lead, will lead to udar vega
also. So the point is not to have a hairsplitting analyses between the two. The
point is to understand the underlying common principle of controlling the urge
of the tongue.

Now, jihva vega today is especially difficult to control in today's culture
because in the past, food was primarily given as charity, and even when food was
sold as a commodity, it was never marketed as agressively as it was today.
Although people throughout history have eaten delicious foods, according to their
culture, according to social situations, but the sheer amount of marketing that
happens today is historically unprecedented. And because of that, people are
caught in a cultural bind actually. The cultural bind is, because our society
often looks down at people who are obese. Now, people who are fat, the whole
society is moved, idea is to look good, to look smart, and generally, smart
looks are equated with thin looks.

So a person who is obese is almost treated like a "pare barya", is a, is like a,
like an untouchable, or a visually untouchable, unseeable person. Such a person
actually, people, just to try to avoid looking fat, do all sorts of things. They
do bariatric surgeries, they often undergo anorexia, they do not eat food
properly. So on one side, people have uncontrolled tongues which are further
fueled by the external propaganda, which makes them want to eat more and more
and more, and on the other side there is the cultural glamorisation of the thin
figure, which prevents people from eating, and both ways, people want both, want
to have a thin good looking figure, and they also want to have, enjoy the
tongue's delights, which the tongue is also pulling them and externally also the
culture is glamorising various foods.

So it is a, it is a torturous situation and generally, it is damn if you do it,
amn if you do not do it. So damn if you do not eat, because the mind will keep
torturing the senses, the tongue will keep torturing, if you do it, then because 

