Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HhhHUQ0iKg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=sanL7VlbFl00AoSjuzbA1icJfmJ8MTU0MTgzMDcxOUAxNTQxNzQ0MzE5&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_035_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_5_Part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=0HhhHUQ0iKg&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction. We are continuing now with the text:

        dīkṣā...
        kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta

So, we will discuss a few points. There is a lot of important point that Srila
Prabhupada makes in his purport. So, I will discuss a few points. Let us look at
this powerpoint over here. So, we see, we discussed most of it, but here we will
see, the bottom. How a person interacts with uttama adikari. So, we go with
faith, and we inquire. When we inquire, we associate, and we serve. So, it is
said that there is, we inquire, and then when in the process of inquiry, we become
more close, we learn association. And then in the association, we serve. And
then serve, when we serve a person, our faith in that person increases again.
And greater faith, we make more, mo..., deeper, more intimate inquiries. And
then that deepens our relationship, the association becomes even deeper.

Then, so, it begi..., faith, inquiry, association, service. It goes on
cyclically like that. It is an ever deeping cycle. So, it is said that actually
when we associate with the mahabhagavata, you know, it is a true leader is one
who knows the way, goes the way, and shows the way. A true leader is who knows
the way. That means this is the way I should go. And not only knows the way, it
is, actually after doing the way, often going along the way is not easy. It
requires a lot of struggle. So, leader sets the example, and goes the way. And
then actually, tr..., goes to the journey, which one has to go through. And then
finally shows the way. Ok, this is how you should go. So, this is actually the
characteristic of a true leader and we see this in Srila Prabhupada, in the way
he lived and shared Krishna Consciousness with others.

So, a leader is one who knows the way. 02:10
