Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gce7-RDx-mw
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=iDXqO5q9NH8kTQTCTKHMG76DsVZ8MTU0MDY1ODc4NEAxNTQwNTcyMzg0&event=video_description&v=Gce7-RDx-mw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_028_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_2_Part_3_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Nectar of Instruction part of the Bhakti Sastri course.

Today, we will conclude the second text which discusses six elements that are
contrary to bhakti. So out of the six, we have discussed four already: atyahara,
prayasa, prajalpa and niyamagraha. Now, we will discuss jana sanga and laulyam.

Like we discussed earlier, the point here is not to do hairsplitting analysis of
things. The point is to understand the broad principles. So, technically, we
might feel that there is some similarities between laulyam and atyahara. We will
discuss the slight differences that are there. But the important point is to
understand the broad principles.

So let us look at jana sanga. Now, in a sense, there is a correlation between
all of these things. See, when, when we have atyahara, when we have the urge to
accumulate more and more and more, then that leads to prayasa, because more
things do not come free. So we have to do prayasa. And when we do prayasa, then
we naturally have to, for the sake of prayasa, overendeavor, we have jana sanga.

We have the association of non-devotees. Because materialistic people are
engaged in overendeavor for the sake of material gratification. And when they
do jana, when they do jana sangha, materialistic people are greedy, so laulyam
also comes up.

So, atyahara is a tendency to accumulate more and more. Laulyam is a greed. So,
the two are related. There is subtle difference. So atyahara is something which
is more intrinsic. Laulyam is something which is more acquired. But overall,
the way Prabhupada explains it, the point is that atyahara is a little bit more
subtle, whereas laulyam is a bit, a bit more explicit. But then, when there is
jana sanga and laulyam, then naturally by that, when we are associating with
materialistic people, we end up talking materialistic things. So, there is
prajalpa.

And, as we associate with materialistic people who are not following any
principles, who do not follow any rules, then the result of that is we do not
feel the importance of those rules ourselves. Or materialistic people follow
rules because they feel that these are just rituals to be observed.

So both kinds of niyamagraha happen when see that, we associate with
non-devotees. So jana sanga in one sense is a very detrimental level of bad
association, jana sanga. And actually, Srila Prabhupada does not talk much about
it here. At the same topic is talked about in the next verse also, where it
talks in positive sense of what are the things that will stimulate our bhakti,
and Srila Prabhupada talks about that over here. So, we will look at jana sanga
today.

Jana sanga, sanga means association, jana is people. So, the devotees are called
as vishnu jana, or the gopis in the Tenth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, when they
are glorifying, those who glorify Krishna, they are called as "buridha janaha",
"jana" is people, "buridha", those who give the great charity. So "buri jana",
those who do good to others. But generally, the word "jana" itself is used here
in the sense of generi..., ordinary people.

So "jana sanga" is the association of ordinary people. When in the Bhagavad
Gita, Krishna describes that by associaton, desire develops. So in 2.62, He
says:

        dhyayato visayan pumsah
        sangas tesupajayate
        sangat sanjayate kamah
        kamat krodho 'bhijayate

So here, the sequence is one, but the word has many meanings. So "dhyayato"
contemplates the sense objects, then we develop attachment for them. And from
attachment, desires develop. So sanga, the word has double-meaning and the
meanings are related. One meaning of sanga is attachment. The other meaning of
sanga is association. So sanga, these two meanings are related because by
association attachment develops, and by attachment association is chosen. So if
somebody likes cricket, then that is the attachment. Then, if somebody comes,
that person comes to a hostel or comes to a new place, where he just resides for
work, then find out who are the other people who like cricket, and mix with
those people.

So by attachment, association develops, and by association also, attachment
develops. Now, if I say, from, if a person goes from India to America. And in
America, say, soccer is very popular. Then the person is staying in the hostel
over there, and everybody is mad for soccer, the person also develops attachment
for soccer over there, attachment develops for that. So these two are symbiotic,
by our attachment, we choose that kind of association, and by the kind of
assocation that is there around, then our attachments also develop.

So in the process of bhakti, we would like to have both of these spiritualised.
If you associate with devotees, then devotees have spiritual desires. They have
devotional attachments. And by their association, we will also develop
devotional attachments. When we see how seriously devotees are studying
scripture, trying to worship Krishna, trying to serve Krishna, then we will also
like loving, loving and serving Krishna, so by that association, attachment to
Krishna will develop. And similarly, if we have some attachment to Krishna, so
then when we go to a particular place, we will try to seek out, where are
devotees over there. And we will try to associate with those devotees, so these
two can, this reciprocity, this symbiotic nature of association, attachment can
be, work in our favor.

Now here, the word sanga primarily refers to assocation. So, jana sanga refers
to at association of wordly minded people. Now, what exactly happens when we
associate with worldly minded people? Before we understand that, let us first
understand what we mean by association. Now, association is not just a physical
proximity. Physical proximity can be there without having association. How is
that possible? That happens because we say, have the spiritual master,
Prabhupada would give this example, sitting on a vyasasana, and there is fly,
sitting on the body of the spiritual master, irritating the spiritual master.
So, the fly is having physical con..., proximity to the spiritual master, but
the fly is getting no benefit.

Is the fly association with the spiritual master? No, the fly is just simply
associating with potential food, with some, maybe it can get, bite and it can
get some blood, it can get some pass, so it is, it has no capacity to understand
what it is doing from the spiritual perspective. Therefore, just physical
proximity in and of itself is not association. The, of course, physical
proximity generally shapes and affects most people.

So then what exactly is assocation? Association essentially means emotional
exchanges. So whenever we associate with someone, we have sharing of emotions.
We try to give our emotions to them, and they give their emotions to us. So,
whenever that happens, the transfer of emotions, when that happens, that is
association. Sometimes, in the temple, there are some employees. Now, those
employees come to the temple. If they are not devotees, and if they are not
inclined to become devotees, then they come to the temple, they may come for
twenty-five years to the temple.

Or sometimes, next to the temple, there are people who are staying as
neighbours. Now, for whatever reason, they do not, they do not become inclined
to devotional service, and they are having physical proximity with so many
devotees, but their hearts do not change because their emotional world is
entirely different from the devotees' emotional world, from Krishna's emotional
world, and they do not strive to bring about an intersection between the two.
Because of this, lack of intersection between the two, the result is that there
is just no transfer of emotions, and because of no transfer of emotions,
effectively, there is no association. Although there may be physical proximity.

So, association means transfer of emotions. And emotions are integrally
connected with desires. So somebody, say there is some..., somebody comes from
Africa or maybe some part of the world, not South Africa, but other countries in
Africa where cricket is unknown, and that person comes as a student to India to
study in an Indian College, and Indian students are just mad for cricket. And
then, the cricket match, and the, and the final over, the Indian, Indian teams
wins by hitting a sixer, and then the whole hostel erupts enjoy. And this
person, what is happening over here? Nothing makes sense for him. But then, just
by seeing the excitement of everyone, there is an infectious effect. Now, the
infectious effect can be positive or negative, depending on the nature of what
is going on in the association. So that person gets affected, and the desires
develop accordingly.

So, when there is a transfer of emotions, when that person, everybody is
celebrating, and this person also joins the celebration, and because who does
not want to celebrate ultimately? Everybody wants to be happy in life, so if
people are happy, they are celebrating, this person joins the celebration, and
by, by engaging those emotions, that person's soul gets the desires. So, what is
the difference between emotions and desires? They are very similar, but the
difference is that, emotions are more like feelings which come to us. And
desires are our at..., our aspirations for certain things, our, our cravings for
certain things. Aspirations are used generally in a positive sense, craving is
often used in a negative sense. But essentially, both are the same power.

So, desires produce emotions, emotions produce desires. Now, the, when we enjoy
the emotions that materialistic people are enjoying, then we get the desires
that they are having. And those desires are often non-devotional, because those
desires are non-devotional, or sometimes even anti-devotional. So non-devotional
desires means people want to just, say, as I said, talk about cricket, talk
about politics. Now that there is no direct breaking of the regulative
principles involved in this, so they are non-devotional. But if somebody talks
about sensuality, sexuality, and talks about such things. Then that is involving
breaking of the regulative principles. So that is anti-devotional.

So in jana sanga, there can be non-devotional and there can be anti-devotional.
And both are detrimental, but anti-devotional is far far more detrimental.
Non-devotional can be value neutral, and non-devotional can help us to move
forward. You know, without much disturbance, if we do not get infected by any
desires excessively. So now, Srila Prabhupada gives the example that any person
who wants to do something, you know, and wants to do in an effective way, tries
to create association. So there can be an association of bankers, association of
stock brokers, association of golf players. There are so many cul..., clubs, in
which people try, like-minded people try to come together and do the things
which they want, which they like to do.

Similarly, he says, we got this Krishna Consciousness movement. What is the
purpose of the Krishna Consciousness movement? To bring, to provide a forum, for
those who are interested in Krishna to come together and nourish their
attraction to Krishna. So, in the Krishna Conscious movement, we learn who is
Krishna, what is our relationship with Him, why we should love Him, and how we
should love Him. So, all these are very important things for a devotee. And in
the Krishna Conscious association, we learn all these things. So this is "sadhbir
bhaktir prasadyaticu" should happen if you come in the association of devotees.

And in fact, a large part of this book will talk about how good association
works and how good association nourishes us. Here, we will focus on how bad
association can affect us. So, I will talk about three things, three levels of
bad, affect of bad association. One is bad affect, association affecting our
desires. Second is association, bad, bad association affecting our intelligence.
And third is bad association affecting our faith. These are progressively deeper
and more dangerous.

So, we, first is bad association affecting our desires. That means, see, desires
come and go. Sometimes, we are just walking along the street, and see some
sight, and suddenly a strong desire comes up, and we feel contaminated, we feel
tucked by that desire, but then it is a temporary desire, and then maybe the
intelligence comes back online, hey, I should not be doing this thing.
And intelligence comes back and there is not too much damage. So this can happen
temporarily. Say, this scriptural example for this is Skala Krishna Das. Now,
Skala Krishna Das was with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and when he was with Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, he was actually experiencing the extraordinary pastimes of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Actually, South India preaching tour was probably the most
extraordinary teaching tour.

You know the kind of preaching Caitanya Mahaprabhu did in the South India tour
was unparallel. Even North India preaching tour was also wonderful, but South
India, he did so many extraordinary things. So, you will see so all these
things, but still, when he was going through the area when the bhattarya was
staying, the bhattarya sent some woman, and he got attracted. Now, when he got
attracted, what was it? The desire overpowered him.

So, because of the association with the bhattarya woman, he got the desire and
he went away in their midst. And when he went in their midst, Caitanya
Mahaprabhu went there. Caitanya Mahaprabhu risked his life. And then he caught,
Kaliya Krishna Das back. And he dragged him back, and Kaliya Krishna, Krishna
Das was mortified. Now, he was throughout the remaining journey, serving
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. But he was very ashamed of what he had done.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu came him back and handed him the association of devotees. He
says, you sent this person. What kind of person did you send? He left me for
some, for enjoying some woman. And he was so apologetic, devastated. The devotee
saw that he was actually repentant, and they decided to give him other service.
And then they engaged him in the service of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu come to
Puri, all the devotees in Navadvip are longing to know how Caitanya Mahaprabhu
is, so please go to Navadvip and tell them. And this way, he got service and he
was able to reinstantiate himself.

But the point is, Kaliya Krishna Das, the desire became too strong for him. But
as soon as he was reminded the right thing, he immediately came back on the
right track, and then he became repentant. So, this can happen to us, also. Now,
say, we go, if we are staying in a hostel, or if we are staying in some
non-devotee association, and then, suppose we go to a friend's room. And then
that person has got a computer. And that person opens the computer and suddenly,
we are just talking, and some nasty sites come up, some terrible videos come up,
and in the rush of the moment, we could be caught up. And then get some perverse
delight out of it, and then afterwards, when we come back, we say, what
happened? We just come out of the room. What did I do? Why did I do that?

So, what happened at that time was, just the desire overpowered us at that time.
So, this can happen, this is, so bad association, because those people have that
kind of desires, by their association, tuck, the desire comes in us. And we get
overcome. But then, after some time, when we come out of the bad association, or
our intelligence becomes awakened again, our intelligence becomes sort of
anaesthetised at that time, this cannot think much at that time. But as soon as
our intelligence comes back, we just reject that and come out of there.

So, this is harmful. But even more harmful is when because of bad association,
our intelligence gets damaged. So, how can that happen when our intelligence
gets damaged? So, how can that happen when our intelligence gets damaged? It can
happen as we see in the case of ajamil. You know, in the case of ajamil, he was
a cultured brahmana, having such good qualities that most of us cannot even
aspire to have those qualities. So, he had these good qualities, but when he saw
that sudra and sudra are embracing, he has lost his intelligence, and he called
that sudra, and he, now, he, this was, this happened in a very spiritual
culture.

It was a, it was a very civilised, dignified culture, and he was a brahmana. So
pretty malware (?, 17:29), now even in today's society, if a person does like
this, it will be scandalous. You know, somebody is just getting some other
woman, and then throwing his own wife out of the house, throwing his bed out
of the house, that will be scandalous even by today's standards, what to speak
of those standards. And surely, people give him good advise at that time, his,
for parents would try to make him see senses, his wife woud try to make him see
sense, other brahmanas would try to make him see sense. But that infatuation has
destroyed his intelligence. As the same was:

        dhyayato visayan pumsah
        sangas tesupajayate
        sangat sanjayate kamah
        kamat krodho 'bhijayate

So, from the desire comes strong desire. From attachment comes lust. From lust
comes anger. "krodhad bha" from "bhavati sammohah", illusion comes. "sammohat
smrti-vibhramah", there is forgetfulness, loss of memory, "smrti-bhramsad
buddhi-naso", then there is destruction of intelligence. And "buddhi-nasat
pranasyati", one falls, so for him, is intelligence called destroyed.

So, it took almost a life time. Now, right from his youth to near his old age,
he lost time. He wasted time. And then finally, somehow, he came back to this
senses. You know, gave his child the name Narayan, by the association of
devotees. Some saints, some, say, brahmanas, some saints had come to his place,
some, and they suggested, why don't you give the child name Narayan? He agreed.
And he was calling Narayan, that is how, we know the story how the Yamadutas
came, and the sudras came at rescuing, because he called out Narayan. So in his
case, his intelligence was destroyed.

So, how can this happen to us? This can happen to us when people come along and
try to intellectually attack our faith. So, people try to, for example, some
atheists may come, and say, there is God? If God is there, why is there so much
suffering in this world? Not only you are suffering, even though you are devoted
to God, you are suffering. So God has designed this world? Well, why has God
designed this world? How, where can you see the God's design? Everything is ok
out, if you say God has provided rains, then why is there rains in the ocean?
You know, God is not providing the rain. It is all by the arrangement of nature.
So, if rains were meant to provide water for us, and why do the rains have to
fall in the ocean?

So, when intellectually we are attacked, really, yeah, it makes sense, ah, yeah,
God shor..., does God really create the world? Maybe there is no God. And then
what happens is, intellectually we are assailed. And intellectual attack can be
quite dangerous because at least, when we are attacked at the level of desires,
we feel fallen. Because we feel, eh, why do I succumb to those desires? But when
we are assailed by doubts, actually we do not feel fallen, we feel superior. It
is people. How can they believe such things? These are all mythology. What is
the proof for this?

So actually, among desires and doubts, doubts are more dangerous. Because
desires make us feel lower, somewhat inferior, morally fallen. But doubts make
us feel intellectually superior. They make us feel, ah, I am higher. These
people, they do not have the intelligence to understand these things. I
understand. I understand that it all does not make sense. I will not believe
such things. So what happens is? Doubts are more dangerous.

So when the intelligence is destroyed by such arguments, then it becomes
difficult for a person to realise what is to be done. So, actually, the answer
is, the, the point is that, if we come to a room, if we come to a mansion, where
there are fifty rooms. And one is unclean and there are forty-nine rooms which
are clean. So, now, if there are forty-nine rooms which are clean,
well-organised, well-kept, then we can infer from that that there is a plan over
here. There is a person who is taking care of it.

Now, if one room is unclean, there can be some other reason for that, maybe
there is some other person who is making the room unclean, although there is
person who is cleaning it, or maybe that room is temporarily out of the
jurisdiction, or maybe that room is intentionally kept unclean because that is
meant for some other purpose. We do not know. So an unclean room does not prove
the absence of a designer as strongly as a clean room proves or demonstrates of
points towards the presence of the designer, presence of a cleaner, presence of
a person who keeps things right.

So, actually speaking, there is a higher principle over here. Why is there
suffering in this world? There is arrangement for our pro..., provision for our
food, cloth, food, air, water, heat, light. You know along with that,
occasionaly, there are shortages. Why? Because that is a, there is another
principle operating over there. That is the principle of karma. So why water
falls in the oceans? Multiple reasons are there, but from the philosophical
point of view, Krishna, if somebody wants to believe, disbelieve in God, Krishna
will give them reasons to disbelieve. So why water falls in the oceans? To give
atheists arguments so that they will disbelieve in God. So, they will not see
all the evidences for the existence of God. They will just see this. So, we are
not, of course, talking about refuting atheism over here.

I have given classes and I have written articles on this separately. Srila
Prabhupada has spoken about this also in his various books. But here, our focus
is on the single point that when we are intellectually assailed by bad
association, that is even more detrimental. So, then, when we are intellectually
assailed like this, what should we do? We should go to intellectually oriented
devotees, who can give intellectual answers to those questions. So, when we are
assailed by bad desires, what do we have to do? We have to get out of that
situation, and go in a situation where we get good desires.

So, deeper than this, that type of jana sanga is, when actually our faith is
attacked. So, now, we may wonder what is the difference between intelligence and
faith? An example makes this clear. The example of faith getting destroyed is
Kaikeyi with respect to Rama. You know, when Manthara fed horrible evil poison to
Kaikeyi, then the result of that was, Kaikeyi actually started doubting the
Supreme Lord. She started thinking that Rama is the cause of my suffering. And
not only were her desires perverted, actually, initially, when K..., Manthara
came with the news that Rama is going to be coro..., coronated, Kaikeyi was so
happy. She took all the jewel necklace from one of..., she has got... She got such
wonderful news. You take this necklace. And Manthara threw the necklace on the
ground. Stupid lady, do not you understand what is happening? And she started
shouting at her, and she insulted her, and she fed her poison. And by the end of
that poison feeding session, the poison went from her ears through her head
right to the heart. And she started thinking of that Rama who was more dear to
her than life, whom she loved as much as she loved Bharata. She started thinking
that Rama is my gr..., greatest enemy.

I will drive Rama out, otherwise it will be no good for me in my life. And then,
in this case, she became negatively disposed towards Rama. It is not only that
her intelligence was destroyed. Definitely, Shivaratri tried to persuade her
intellectually. Now, Shistha tried to persude her about. Nan..., Sumantra spoke
to her. Sumantra was the minister, but nobody could do anything. But she lost
her faith.

So, even we are intellectually baffled by something, at that time, that means,
it is a logical argument. You know the answer. It is di..., it is disturbing.
But, but faith is much deeper than intellectual conviction. Intellectual
conviction helps us to develop faith. But faith is much much more, much deeper.

So, what happened to her? Actually, it is only when what she had faith in, got
shattered. Then, her antipathy, her loss of faith in Rama was shakened up. So,
what did she have faith in? She had faith that I am doing all this for the sake
of Bharat, and Bharat will be very happy. And then Bharat will be happy, I am
doing this for all his pleasure. But when Bharat came to know about her, evil
conspiracy, he was so mortified and horrified. He said you are not my mother. If
you had not been my mother, I would have killed you. You are the godess of
destruction, incarnated in our family to destroy our whole dynasty. He says, I
will no longer call you my mother. And then, she heard these words, the bubble
of imaginary fantasies which she had made, and which she was using to justify all
the wrongs that she was doing, all the hurts she had caused, that bubble, tuck,
bursted.

And when the bubble bursted, then she thought. What have I done? And then she
went to Lord Rama and Bharat went to try to persuade her to come back. And she
begged for forgiveness from Rama. So this is actually most dangerous, when our
faith is lost.
