Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9l7004Gh_Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=F5Z33U9yBV466VCQQaai7tTerOp8MTU0MTgzMDc1MEAxNTQxNzQ0MzUw&event=video_description&v=J9l7004Gh_Q&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_036_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_6_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction series which we are doing in the
Bhakti Sastri. Now, we will go deeper into our discussion and association. In
previous two verses, texts, we discussed first of all the six full exchanges,
"dadāti pratigṛhṇāti", and then after that we discussed about respecting
different devotees, or at different levels of con... spiritual, advancement. And
now, we will discuss about the advanced devotee, especially. How such a devotee
should not be seen with material vision. So, let us look at the, the text over
here.  So, it is:

        dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair
        na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta janasya paśyet
        gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṅkair
        brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ

So, "dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair", so "dṛṣṭaiḥ" means when we see
with our eyes, "svabhāva-janitair", what is bound from the "svabhāva", from the
nature. "vapuṣaś ca doṣair", "vapuṣaś" is the body, so the "doṣair" is the
faults. So whatever difficulties are present in the body, "na prākṛtatvam iha
bhakta janasya paśyet", so they are "dṛṣṭaiḥ", they are visible, but "nasya
paśyet", one should not see them. "prākṛtatvam", because they are, they are
material. The devotee is essentially practicing spiritual life, especially the
acharya is teaching us spiritual life. So, "nasya paśyet", "iha bhakta janasya",
for such devotees, one should not see. Why no..., when the example is given how
one should not see.

"gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṅkair", "gaṅgāmbhasāṁ", then the water of
the Ganga, "budbuda-phena-paṅkair", so there are bubbles, there is foam, there
is dirt, but these one does not see. One understands that the purity of the
Ganga is trancendental.

"brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ", so what will happen, because of it
being watered, that will happen, "nīra-dharmaiḥ". But "brahma-dravatvam", its
trancendental nature is not affected. "apagacchati", so just as Ganga water
remains pure, inspite of the presence of impure things, like bubbles, and foam,
and dirt. Similarly, a pure devotee remains, advanced devotee remains
transcendental even if there are some bodily defects. So:

"Being situated in his original Krishna conscious position, a pure devotee does
not identify with the body. Such a devotee should not be seen from a
materialistic point of view. Indeed, one should overlook a devotee's having a
body born in a low family, a body with a bad complexion, a deformed body, or a
diseased or infirm body. According to ordinary vision, such imperfections may
seem prominent in the body of a pure devotee, but despite such seeming defects,
the body of a pure devotee cannot be polluted. It is exactly like the waters of
the Ganges, which sometimes during the rainy season are full of bubbles, foam
and mud. The Ganges waters do not become polluted. Those who are advanced in
spiritual understanding will bathe in the Ganges without considering the
condition of the water."

So, Srila Prabhupada actually integrates the purport in the translation, because
he gives multiple examples. Here, for example, this whole sentence, is, Srila
Prabhupada explicitly "prākṛtatvam iha bhakta janasya paśyet", so, the various
that cannot be, that may be seen, this especially, this sentence, "...one should
overlook...", what one should overlook? These specific examples are not there in
the text, but Srila Prabhupada is giving it to make it clear for us what "na
prākṛtatvam" means. Do not see from material point of view. So, born in a low
family, bad complexion, deformed body, or diseased or infirmed body. You know,
diffe.., different, difference between bad complexion, deformed and diseased,
it is that bad complexion means the looks are not very good. Deformed means the
body is shaped improperly, maybe some limbs are missing, some fingers are
missing, and diseased or infirmed body means maybe, you know, there is a lot of
cough, and mucus coming out, or there was pass because of some disease, as it
happened to Sanatan Goswami.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not see that until he embraced. So, these are all
points, distinctive, all of them. And inspite of that, a devotee remains
transcendental. Prabhupada says, these may be prominent, they may seem
prominent, but despite, and actually, they are not e..., Prabhupada said, they
are not even seeming defects. The body is not polluted. Why? Because it is used
for the service of Krishna. And in that sense, it remains always pure. So, let
us look at the purport. We will see over here, the overview. So, in the sixth
text over here, the offenses against a pure devotee. What are the possible
offenses?

Prabhupada explains criticism of bodily defects. So, what are the bodily defects
possible? Prabhupada gives a list of that. And Srila Prabhupada connects that
with "api cet su-durācāro". So, we may wonder why are the bodily defects present
in the body of someone? Now, sometimes, we may start thinking, oh, because that
person must have done some bad karma. Because of these, bodily defects are
present. See, first thing we have to understand is that the principle of karma
is not to be applied for postmortem. It is always to be applied for prognosis.
Postmortem means that, you know, when a person is suffering, we have no business
inquiring what bad karma that person did because of his, which that person is
suffering. It is, karma, the principle of karma is for us to understand that if
I do wrong activities, I will get wrong consequence. You know, if we start
applying karma for postmortem, then there is no limit. You know, when a mot...
mother is caring for a baby, and the baby starts crying, the mother starts
thinking, oh, baby is crying, must be feeling some pain. That pain has to be
because of past karma. So let the baby cry.

You know, we will just choke all love. And choke all humanity out of a
relationships if we start bringing past karma into our interaction with each
other. We need to interact with each other based on human culture and Indian
devotional culture, which is extremely sensitive. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did
not ever say to Sanatan Goswami, oh, these boys have come upon you, you know,
what sinful karma did you?

You know, he said, no. I am a sannyasi. And I should be able to see beyond such
externals. So, without, if I do not see beyond externals, to the essence, the
soul, then I am having it, there is a defect in my sannyasi. I am not truly
renounced. So, he did not focus on what that person's karma was. He focused on
what his dharma was. So, in all situations, when we are dealing with others. We
have to consider what is our dharma. You know, imagine if we start thinking that
people are suffering because of their bad karma, then, you know, a thief, goes
and robs in a person's house, and the person goes to the king. He says, I have
been robbed. He says it is your past karma that you have been robbed. The person
will just remain in that situation.

So, in, when we deal with people, we deal with them based on how, the, their
this life situation. Based on their this life situation. How, what is their
situation in this life. You know, if a person has earned money honestly, and
after that has been robbed. then, there is no way, no point for us, we have no
right to consider what the past karma of that person was because of it, that
person got robbed. From this point, this life's point of view, it is wrong, and
the king has to take the responsibility and make sure that the robber is
punished, and the stolen amount is written, returned. You know. When this, f...,
last year, there was a terrible gang rape in Delhi. So, I wrote an article about
that. So after that, I was asked a question on my website. You know, what was
the karma of that woman who was raped? So, this is not a question which we
should be asking at all.

When Draupadi was disrobed, nobody asked him, what was the karma because of
which you were disrobed. No. They all understood that this was a, this was a
monstrous injustice. And it had to be punished. So, when a person is suffering,
at that time, I, we should not be doing a postmortem, oh, this suffering has
come because of some past karma. We should be thinking, what is my dharma? How
can I help in such a situation? So, if we do not keep the philosophy of karma in
its proper perspective, its perspective is, it is a philosophy of
accountability that we are accountable for our actions. What I do, I will get
the consequences. And, therefore, I should act according to my dharma. So, if a
king, even if the king thinks philosophically, oh, this person has been robbed
because that person must have done some bad karma. But that is not the king's
business. What the king has to think, what is my dharma right now. My dharma is
to protect my citizens and to preve..., punish wrongdoers. I must do that. If I
fail in my dharma, then I will be doing bad karma. And I will bear consequences
for that. So, we are not meant to judge people based on their karma. We are
meant to decide our actions based on our dharma.

So, what is our dharma? The mother's dharma is to care for the child. She has
given birth to the child. It is her child. That child depends on her. 10:11
          
