Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tcs0hJqz0Xw Audio:
https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=C_1mmGEoTHBhTfruMCHgBWMoEt18MTU0MTgzMDkwMkAxNTQxNzQ0NTAy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_041_-_The_Nectar_of_Instruction_Text_11_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=Tcs0hJqz0Xw&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Nectar of Instruction.

Today, we will be discussing the last verse. That is the eleventh verse. The
ninth and tenth verses we discussed, the topmost place and the topmost devotee.
Now, both these analyses are combined together to talk about both of them in
offering their combined through service of Radha-kunda. So, let us look at this
particular text. So, here, we will see, before we look at the text, let us look
at the translation of the verse.

        kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ preyasībhyo ’pi rādhā kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā
        munibhir abhitas tādṛg eva vyadhāyi yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ kiṁ
        punar bhakti-bhājāṁ tat premedaṁ sakṛd api saraḥ snātur āviṣkaroti

So, "kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ", "occaiḥ" means high. So, kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ", a very high object
of love for Krishna. "praṇaya-vasatiḥ", that object, "vasatiḥ" is vast, reside.
So, "praṇaya-vasatiḥ" is where Krishna's, where love resides, object of love.
"preyasībhyo", so "preyasī", "preyasī", "preyasī" means lovers. "ībhyo" means
among them. "preyasībhyo ’pi rādhā", so among all of Krishna's lovers, Radha is
the highest. "occaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ".

"kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā", and her kunda, "munibhir abhitas tād", "munibhir abhitas", the
"munibhir" has stated, "muni" is feeling in all respects. "tādṛg eva", exists
similarly, "vyadhāyi", so the "muni" is described that just as Radha is the
topmost of the gopis, similarly, her kunda is the topmost among all places.

"yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ", "yat preṣṭhair", so "preṣṭhair",
    "preṣṭhair", means the dear, most advanced dear, those who are most dear to
    Krishna, those who are most advanced. So, for even the most advanced
    devotees, "apy alam asulabhaṁ", it is difficult to obtain. "kiṁ punar
    bhakti-bhājāṁ", so even for those who are advanced devotees, it is difficult
    to obtain this place, then what to speak of those who are just engaging in
    devotional service.

"tat premedaṁ", that "prem", "sakṛd api saraḥ", that, that love of Godhead,
    "saraḥ" is the river, "snātur", so one who bathes, "snātur", "snān", so one
    who bathes in the holy place, "āviṣk...", "āviṣkaroti", it arouses. So, by,
    by, by eating in that holy place arouses "premedaṁ sakṛd", that "premedaṁ",
    it, even arouses that love, "sakṛd", even once, bathing.

Let us look at the translation:

"Of the many objects of favored delight and of all the lovable damsels of
Vrajabhumi, Srimati Radharani is certainly the most treasured object of
Krishna's love. And, in every respect, Her divine kunda is described by great
sages as similarly dear to Him. Undoubtedly Radha-kunda is very rarely attained
even by the great devotees; therefore it is even more difficult or ordinary
devotees to attain. If one simply bathes once within those holy waters, one's
pure love of Krsna is fully aroused."

Let us look at the overview of the text. We will see that what is the specialty
of Radha-kunda? So, serving Radha-kunda is the theme of this verse. It is not
just bathing in Radha-kunda or living in Radha-kunda. It is serving Radha-kunda.
So, why, why Radha-kunda? Because it belongs to Radharani, who is the most
beloved gopi. She is as dear, and that place, Radha-kunda, is as dear to Krishna
as Radharani himself, herself. And there are unlimited glories. You know, with
the sacredness of it can cast, castly comprehended by us. And it is very rare to
attain. Let us look at these points one by one.

The scriptures extol the glories of God and those associated with God. Now, when
we hear those glories, we sometimes may think that, what, how do we make sense
of this? So, that is through service. You know, when we go to Radha-kunda, it is
not to just see with our eyes. In fact, going to holy dham is not for
sightseeing purposes. It is for purifying, for the purposes of purification.
When we purify ourselves, then the spiritual vision will awaken, and then we
will be able to see. We discussed in our earlier class how text, scriptural
description, plus sensory perception, then it is a, the, complemented with inner
spiritual revelation. That helps us to see the dham actually. So, until then,
until that spi..., spiritual revelation happens, we go to dham primarily for
purification.

So, when we talk about Radha-kunda, attitude has to be of service. And in the
Bhakti-Rasamrta-Sindhu quotes a Puranic verse, it is said:

        ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi
        na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ
        sevonmukhe hi jihvādau
        svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

"ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi", the name, and anything of Krishna, "na bhaved grāhyam
indriyaiḥ", that the gross senses cannot understand, cannot, they are not
perceived into the gross senses. "sevonmukhe hi jihvādau", when we serve
Krishna, becoming the bitter tongue, "ādau", "ādau" is beginning with "jihvā".
And what do we do? "sevonmukhe", so we are all currently "vi-mukhe" from
Krishna, "mukhe" is phase. "vi" is "varudha rupena". So, Krishna is there, right
next to us in our heart. But our heart, we have, we have turned away. We have
become "vi-mukhe" from Krishna. So, because we are seeing away from Krishna, we
are seeing material things instead of spiritual. So, right now, we cannot
perceive the spiritual, when, even when it manifests in the material world. Our
vision is glued, revetted, locked in the material. So, therefore, we need to
free it. And the way to free it is by service. By ser..., rendering service to
Krishna with our material senses, with our material mind and intelligence, with
our material talents, and trying to invest as much of our heart, of
consciousness as possible in it, we become purified. So, "sevonmukhe", so
when Krishna sees that we are trying to turn towards Him, then "svayam eva", by
His own free will, "sphuraty adaḥ", He reveals Himself to us. "sphuraty",
"sphuraty" means spontaneous remembrance. So, Krishna gives us spontaneous
remembrance to us by His own free will. When He sees that we are sincerely
trying to serve Him. And then our consciousness which becomes unglued,
unrevetted, unlocked from matter. And then we are able to perceive spiritual
reality.

So, service is very important even when we go to Radha-kunda. Sometimes, people
think that just by going to a place like Radha-kunda, we become spiritually
advanced. And that is why people sometimes are very eager to stay in
Radha-kunda. 08:00

