Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yLgYnBm_LA0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&redir_token=ag-Yq92XG7VqXEjiGk09_5dqRex8MTU0ODQ4ODQyMUAxNTQ4NDAyMDIx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_088_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_02_to_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=yLgYnBm_LA0

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are in the bhakti section of the Bhagavad Gita. Chapter 7 to 12. Bhagavad Gita
can be divided into three sections. Karma. Bhakti. And Jnana. So, actually, you
know, the full Bhagavad Gita talks about bhakti. But the first six chapters talk
about how, from karma, one can gradually rise to the level of bhakti. And the
last six chapters talk about how, from jnana, one can co..., rise to the level
of bhakti. The middle six chapters focus on bhakti, entirely. You know. So, now,
the Seventh Chapter is "Knowledge of the Absolute". We discussed 7.1 which talks
about how one can by hearing, eventually, come to the level of "mayy
āsakta-manāḥ". So, the first, you know, section, from verses f..., 1 to
Krish..., you know, 12, talks about knowing Krishna fully as the source of the
material and spiritual energies. A source of everything, ultimately. So, you
know, knowing Krishna's glory. And in that, the first section, verses 1 to 3
talk about the glory of kn..., knowing about Krishna. You know. Glory of
knowledge of Krishna. So, let us look at this once again. So, it is the
subsection that we are going through. So, know Krishna in full. That is the
first section. Verses 1 to 12. Within that, the subsection that we are going
through is glory of knowledge about Krishna. That is 1 to 3. And then, we will
have 4 to 7 talking about how Krishna is the source of everything. Material and
spiritual. So, let us look at the verses.

        jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam
        idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ
        yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj
        jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

So, "jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam". So, knowledge and realisation. Both together.
"sa-vijñānam". So, "jñānam" and "vijñānam" are referred to in various places in
the Bhagavad Gita. This combination together. In the Sixth Chapter, we saw
"jñānam", "vijñānam" coming together once in:

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā

That was 6.8. And before that, "jñānam" and "vijñānam", this combination has
been together once again in the section where Krishna talks, h..., you know, you
know, how lust is the destroyer of knowledge and realisation. So, that is in
3.41.

        tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau
        niyamya bharatarṣabha
        pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ
        jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam

So, "jñāna" and "vijñāna". This combination comes repeatedly. And this will come
once again in the Ninth Chapter, also. You know, ni..., in 9.1:

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ
        pravakṣyāmy anasūyave
        jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ
        yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt

So, "jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ". So, Krishna will talk about this in multiple
places. And not everywhere the meanings are the same. Although, there are
simi..., there is similarity in the sense of the usage. So, generally, "jñāna"
refers to theoretical. And "vijñāna" refers to realisational or
transformational, hmm, knowledge. Hmm. You know. Here, Prabhupada uses, is, is
th..., i..., the, the slightly different sense. Here, Prabhupada says, "jñānam"
refers to phenomenal knowledge. And "vijñānam" refers to "numinous knowledge".
Now, what is phenomena and numina? These are actually very philosophical terms.
To understand these terms, we have to recognise that philosophy in itself is the
search for a deeper reality that is beyond the normal. What is normal
perceptua..., perceptual? What is? You know. We perceive it. So, phenomena
refers to things as they appear to us. And numina refers to things as they
actually are independent of our sense perception. Now, what is the difference
between the two? See, one of the fundamental insights, while studying spiritual
knowledge is that, actually, not just spiritual knowledge. Studying any s..., 
knowledge in a, studying the world through any methodology in a serious way. One
of the points which comes up is that things are deeper than what they appear to
be. You know. Reality is not as it appears to our eyes. So, even in, you know,
western history, in the his..., western intellectual history, as well, of
course, in Vedic history, the idea has always been that, you know, the way
things appear. And the way, the things actually are, there is a difference. So,
now, the question comes up. We access the world through our senses. So, you
know, if we put aside our sense perception. Then, how can we know things h...,
as they actually are? So, ev..., actually, this is a debate even within western
philosophy. You know. You know. Western philosophy. There is empiricism and
rationalism. 05:32
