Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TWpiKImevOk
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=HUB0RyXe_L4-9KXVywPIoJnrnEN8MTU0ODQ4OTM3MkAxNTQ4NDAyOTcy&event=video_description&v=TWpiKImevOk&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_114_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_51_to_55_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are at the last part of the Eleventh Chapter. The Eleventh Chapter is called as
the "virāt-rūpa". "viśva-rūpa", rather. So, the "viśva-rūpa" is the description
of the universal form. The revelation of Krishna. And in that, we have
discussed, till now, several sections. You know. Currently, we are at verse
11.51. Which has come pa..., part of the last section. So, let us have an
overview of the various sections before we continue from verse 51. So, verses 1
to 4 are Arjuna's request to see Krishna's universal form. Verses 5 to 8 are
Krish..., Kri..., you know, are Krishna's descriptions of a, of the universal
form.  Krishna is giving a preview of what is going to come. Then, verses 9 to
14 are "Sañjaya"'s description of the universal form. Therein, you know, you
know, you know, you know, you know, "Sañjaya" is, you know, from a distant
perspective, the camera goes backwards. And he describes what is happ..., you
know, what is happening over there. What Arjuna is seeing. 15 to 31 is Arjuna's
description of the, his, the vision. Then, it has several divisions. Four
divisions, precisely.  You know. We discussed Arjuna's, you know, you know,
vision of the universal form. What he saw. Then, he saw, Arjuna's vision of,
what is the effect of the universal form of the universe. Then, Arjuna is
beholding of the kala-rupa. You know. The, on the, the visio..., you know, the
vis..., the form, the vision as manifested on the battlefield. And then, the
effect of that on Arjuna. And concluding with his prayer. Who are you?

        ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

Then, after that, 32 to 34 is Krishna, you know, as the "virāt...",
"viśva-rūpa", telling Arjuna that, you know, you know, become My instrument. And
then, after that, there are Arjuna's prayers. 35 to 46. So, those prayers, also,
we discussed, had four parts. Discussed, first, he offers, you know, he
glorifies. Then, he offers obeisances. Then, he seeks forgiveness. And then, he
requests for the beholding of the, you know, four-handed, "catur-bhujena". And
then, this, return to the "saumya rupa". Now, in the 50th verse, you know,
Krishna has obliged to, Arjuna's request by beholding the "viśva-rūpa". Sorry,
beholding the "catur", from the "viśva-rūpa", he came to the "catur-bhujena"
rupa. And from the "catur-bhujena" rupa, he came to the "dvi-bhuja" rupa. So,
like that, the vision is gone now. And now, you know, Arjuna is now going to
reply to what Krishna has just done for him. So, let us look at the verses.

        arjuna uvāca

        dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ
        tava saumyaṁ janārdana
        idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ
        sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

So, "dṛṣṭvedaṁ". "dṛṣṭvā". "idam". I am seeing. "mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ". The human form.
"tava saumyaṁ janārdana". "tava". Of Yours. "saumyaṁ". "saumyaṁ" is gentle.
Arjuna is, he is beautiful. "saumyaṁ" can mean soft. Gentle. Soothing.
"janārdana". Oh, as we have, we have discussed earlier, the word "janārdana" can
mean, oh, chastiser of the enemies. Or it can also mean, oh, you know, you know,
protector of people in general. "idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ". "idānīm" means now. I
am "saṁvṛttaḥ". Settled. Calmly settled. "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". I have
returned to my own nature. My consciousness. "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ".
"prakṛtiṁ" means nature. So, you know, we see that Kri..., Arjuna has a steady
relationship with Krishna. That is a relationship of friendship. At the external
level, it may appear that Arjuna is a ksatriya. Krishna is a ksatriya. And these
are two ksatriya friends. But that is only an external vision. At a deeper,
internal vision, you know, both of them are transcendental. Krishna is the
Supreme Lord. And Arjuna is the devotee. And so, "prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". So, from
external point of view, "prakṛtiṁ gataḥ" means, ok, two ksatriyas are now
returning to their original friendship. But from an internal perspective, it is
that, the Lord and His devotee are returning to their intimate relationship. So,
that "prakṛtiṁ" is not material "prakṛtiṁ". You know. The word "prakṛtiṁ",
generally, we use in terms of material "prakṛtiṁ". But that is not its only use.
The word "prakṛtiṁ" basically means nature. Or energy. You know. You know. You
know. As nature or energy, you know, the important point is that, there is, you
know, you know, you know, material nature. Or material nature. And spiritual
nature. Or spiritual energy. So, both exist. And both are, you know, you know,
playing, a, a role as per the Lord's will. So, the word "prakṛtiṁ" used in a,
you know, spiritual context. We see in "daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ".

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ
        bhajanty ananya-manaso
        jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

So, in four point, you know, sorry, nine point fou..., you know, thirteen,
Krishna uses this word. So, that is "prakṛtim", He uses. "daivīṁ". As divine.
So, "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". To the, Arjuna has returned back to the normal
situation. So, actually, you know, you know, in this world, also, when we face
very troublesome situations. Suddenly, in this world, something extremely
bewildering happens. You know. We may lose a loved one. Or there may be a
terrible accident in which we get, you know, we get immobilised temporarily. Or
we may have a huge financial loss. Or there might be a big earthquake. Or a
tsunami. Or a, some other hurricane. Or natural disaster. And them, that is in
one sense, we are seeing the "kala-rupa" of Krishna. And even a devotee can get
bewildered when the devotee sees the "kala-rupa" of Krishna. In the sense that,
you know, it, it is not that a devotee is heartless. And when we say, we should
be spiritual, that does not mean that we can naturally, we can, we are normally,
we are dead to all material emotions. You know. We do not want to get carried
away by material emotions. But we should not just distinuish all emotions
between material and spiritual. Yes, that is one level of differentiation. But
there is also something called as human response. So, we should not dismiss
everything at the human level as material. Because we are currently existing at
three levels. Material. Men..., physical. Mental. And spiritual. And in just
physical and mental are material. And they do affect us. So, we see Arjuna,
also, you know, grieved bitterly. You know. When, you know, "Abhimanyu" was
killed. Was it that Arjuna forgot the philosophy? You know. No. It is not that
Arjuna forgot the philosophy. But there are natural emotions of affection
between a father and the son. And their father will naturally grieve. So, the
point here is that a devotee may get overwhelmed. He says, Arjuna, you know, you
know, his:


        mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo

You know. Krishna, when Krishna is argue..., you know, is reassuring Arjuna that
"mā te vyathā". Do not be in a, do not be troubled. "vimūḍha-bhāvo". Do not be
bewildered. So, Arjuna was feeling like that. You know.

        pravyathitāntar-ātmā

He has said in his prayers that "āntar-ātmā". My inner being is completely
"vyathit". So, like that, it can happen to devotees, also, that when, you know,
mat..., material nature shows its ugly feature. You know. It shows the
"kala-rupa". So, at that time, the devotee can also be devastated. And then,
devotee can also lose, you know, perspective. And devotee can become
overwhelmed. So, at that time, just as Arjuna:

        ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

My dear Lord, what is this? What kind of form is this? Now, we hear about
"kala-rupa", conceptually. And it is good to know about the concepts. But along
with that, we also need to know that this is not just a conceptual description.
Along with that, it also, you know, is meant to instruct us. So, the, you know,
unfortunate things that happen in this world, actually, they are the "kala-rupa"
of Krishna. Now, in one sense, "kala":

        kālo ’smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho

Time I am, the destroyer of all the worlds. So, whatever destruction happens.
And whatever destabilisation that brings, it is not just that only the, you
know, destruction at the "Kurukṣetra" war was due to, you know, due to the
"kala-rupa". No. All destruction is by the "kala-rupa". So, we understand this
is also a "kala-rupa". This is not a pleasant form. This is an agitating form.
And as Arjuna first im..., bewilderment, he, what is this my dear Lord? Then,
the Lord responded. And then, he offered obeisances. And then, he said, my dear
Lord, please show me the "saumya rupa". So, like that, when a devotee gets
bewildered. You know. One definition of intelligence, as we have discussed is
to, intelligence means to know what to do when we do not know what to do. That
means that to know what to do when we do not know what to do, that means, there
is a specific what to do. Ok. This problem has come. How do I solve this? I do
not know. We do not know what to do. But there is a generic what to do. What is
that? Pray to Krishna for guidance. B..., beg to Krishna. Krishna, please keep
me engaged in Your service. And please guide me how I can serve You now. So,
when we do that, then what happens by that is we keep moving forward. So,
Krishna will:

        dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

You know:

        yena mām upayānti te

Krishna will give us intelligence of how to, we can move ahead. It may not, it
may not be that the intelligence will come immediately. But it will surely come.
And it will help us to move on in our spiritual life. So:

        sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

And then, when Krishna gives the intelligence, then we will see that, ok, there
is, this "kala-rupa" is there. But along with the "kala-rupa", there is
something wonderful, also, which is happening. What is that something wonderful?
Actually, it is not that a devotee is, you know, hav..., having the head in the
sky. And devotee thinks that the tragedies of this world are wonderful. No. As
devotees, you know, we would like, you know, we, devotees do not want anyone to
suffer. And tragedies bring tremendous suffering. But still, devotees also
understand that, ultimately, it is Krishna who is the caretaker of all living
beings. And Krishna has some plan. And a devotee turns the eyes from the
distractive form of material nature. Which is "kala-rupa", Krishna mani..., of,
Krishna manifesting to the "saumya rupa". So, we look at the "kala-rupa". Then,
we turn to "saumya rupa". You know. The, this is sometimes called as tough love.
This is, the "kala-rupa" of this world is Krishna's tough love. Tough love means
that sometimes, you know, love has to be tough. If a child is not studying. Or a
child is doing mischief. Or a child is playing with fire. At that time, the
mother may have to be tough in her love. There is love. But there is toughness,
also. So, the "kala-rupa" is the tough part. But the Gita wisdom helps us to
know from that, connect the tough part with the love part. And understand,
actually, that, yes, yes, ultimately, we discussed, what is the "kala-rupa"?
"kala-rupa" destroys the temporary to make way for the eternal. Destroys the
temporary to make way for the eternal. That means, you know, when we see the
distractiveness and the desctruction of material nature. Desctruction means,
first, we see that something is just destroyed. And then, by that, we understand
that everything, it, it, we, it give, sinks deeper into us that everything here
is destructible. So, when we see the destruction. It reminds us the
destructibility of everything. It reminds in a very forceful way. And then,
that, in a more, inspires us. Motivates us. Impells us. To redirect our
affection. Our attraction from the temporary to the eternal. From the world to
Krishna. And in that way, our vision shifts from the "kala-rupa" to the "saumya
rupa". And then, in this way, when a devotee takes shelter of Krishna, at that
time, "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". Devotee will become
restored to the normal situation of, yes, Krishna is my master. I am His
servant. And let me keep serving Him forever. That is what we would like to do.
"sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". So, generally, in this world, when, when things, you
know, things get, you know, disturb us. How can things disturb us? You know.
When there is change in the external world, that change naturally disturbs us.
Now, when the change disturbs us, our normal expectation is that Krishna should
shred, set the external thing right. And that is what we pray to Krishna for.
But ultimately, you know, the external is not the shelter for us. The shelter is
the internal. It is our connection with Krishna, that is the shelter. To the
extent that the externals disturb us, to that extent, it indicates that our
internal is not sheltered in Krishna. It means, if my internal shelter is in my
bank account. And suddenly, you know, the Indian rupee devalues. Or there is an
economic slow-down. And then, I realise, oh, my money, it is of not much value.
Or the stock market crash. And I will lose money. I will feel tremendously
agitated. So, that agitation, when I, that I may pray to, may I pray to Krishna.
Krishna, please set this right. Please let this economy come back on track. Or
even if they cannot present, cannot come back on track, at least, let my shares
big, have the money. So, I will have the money. I want to serve You. But I need
money for that, also.

So, now, you know, here, what is happening? The externals have changed. And
through the external change, Krishna is teaching us. It is in..., you are
getting so disturbed. That indicates that your internal shelter is not in Me.
Your internal shelter in something other than Me. And that is an important
learning lesson for a de..., learning opportunity for a devotee. Oh, that means,
I should, what Krishna want..., is demonstrating through me. And what Kri..., is
getting confirmed by my agitation about this issue is that I am not sheltered in
Krishna. So, let me take shelter of Krishna. Let me move my inner shelter from
money to Krishna. You know. If I have some respectable position even in devotee
circles. And suddenly, my position is challenged. Then, what happens when my
position is challenged? At that time, I start feeling that, oh, you know, I have
this position. I may be a counsellor. And when I start feeling, oh, what is
this? You know. People are not respecting my, the counsellor. My counsellor.
Yes. You know. He is saying that I am not, I am not, you know, caring enough. I
am not competent enough. I am not advanced enough. This. That. And becuase of
that, I feel, I may feel my position challenged. Now, I may get disturbed. Now,
the disturbance indicates that my shelter is not in service to Krishna. But my
shelter is in the, you know, in the prestige that I am getting as a counsellor.
So, what should we do in such a situation? Now, we may see, no, but we need the
externals, also, to be right to serve Krishna. We need some financial stability
by which we can serve Krishna. If I have to serve as a counsellor. If somebody
is just going around, you know, you know, doing character assassination on me,
of me, me, then how can I serve Krishna? You know. That may be true. But we have
to see, things, see things first and foremost at the internal level. So, let me
get my shelter within. And when we do that, you know, Kri..., there are external
changes which are meant primarily to help us make internal changes. And when
the, Krishna sees us making internal changes, then Krishna can make the external
changes far more Kri..., easily, and effectively than what we can do by all our
plans and endeavors. You know. So, that means, a devotee should be able to move
inwards. And make, make internal changes. You know. Not, not that it means we
are passive externally. Not that we accept everything that happens externally
passively. But that we do not just act only at the external level. Ok. What
inner change, what improvement can I try to make? Now, we may say changing our
shelter from some material attachment to Krishna is not easy. Yes, that is true.
And it is not going to happen overnight. Definitely. That is true. But I, it is
never going to happen. Leave alone happening overnight. If we do not try for
it. So, these sort of situations when we are shaken up.

        pravyathitāntar-ātmā       

Our inner being is completely troubled. That time, this is the opportunity for
us to align our inner, you know, you know, you know, our inner compass towards
Krishna. You know. It has often gone a little off-track. Yes, I want Krishna,
also. But along with that, I want many other things, also. So, we get the co...,
inner compass back us straight focused on Krishna. And then, when we do that,
you know, then:

        sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

Then, we return back to that inner position of calmness. Of, you know, poise. Of
happiness. So, as we get, normally have in our relationship with Krishna. So,
now Krishna will speak after this. Now, before we move forward, here, let us
look at one more point. Krishna is saying over, Arjuna is telling over here.
"mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ". What does this word "mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ" indicate? You know. That,
Prabhupada's whole commentary is focused on this. That, you know, the Lord's
original form is "mānuṣaṁ". "mānuṣaṁ" is, is it, is it, does it mean mortal? No.
It means human. Human means, the Lord originally has a two-handed form. A form,
just like, that, that is just like yours and mine. Or rather, you know,
sometimes, people say that is our form. You know. How, why should God have a
form like ours? So, it is not that God has a form like ours. It is that we have
a form like God's. You know. There are two different conceptions. There is
anthropomorphism. And there is theomorphism. Anthropomorphism means morphised
form. Like we morphology. The study of structures. Study of shapes in biology.
Morphology. And then, there is, anthropomorphism means that the idea that we
have ascribed God a human form. Because we are human beings. So, we have
envisioned God in a human form. You know. This is actually, it is just very
self-centered analysis. Because we are taking ourselves to be the reference
point. The starting point. You know. But the fact is that the scriptures
describe that God has a form. And God's original form is reflected, you know, in
our form. So, man is made in the image of God. Even the Bible says that. And
Krishna says also in 15.7, as we will see, He says that:

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke
        jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

"aṁśaḥ". "aṁśaḥ" means sparks. So, we are all sparks of Krishna. So, "mānuṣaṁ
rūpaṁ". So, this form of Krishna is originally the two-handed form. And that is
not a mortal, material form. That is a transcendental eternal form. And that
form is what Arjuna is seeing now.

        dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ
        tava saumyaṁ ...

"saumyaṁ". This is very affectionate. It is very easy. It is much more easier to
develop an affectionate relationship with the form of Krishna as, as a
two-handed person than as a "kala-rupa". You know. What do you do? As Arjuna,
when you have to offer obei..., what to speak of, say, embracing. Or expressing
love. Or talking. Even obei..., even obei..., even obering..., offering
obeisances is difficult. Because Arjuna says, where should I offer obeisances?
You know.

        ... atha pṛṣṭhatas te

You know.

        namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kṛtvaḥ

        namaḥ purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te
        namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva

He says, I offer "sahasra-kṛtvaḥ". I offer obeisances again an again. "namaḥ
purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te". I offer obeisances ahead and behind. And again,
again, I offer obeisances. So, you know, even we are offering, offering,
offering, and offering, offering obeisances is difficult, what to speak of doing
other things. So, therefore, what is important here is, "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ
gataḥ". That, you know, this "mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ" is the original form. And relating
with the original form is the original nature of the living entity. And when we
understand this, then we will return to the original nature. If we think of
going to some other relationship. Or going to a relationship with some other
form. That may be, sorry, other manifestation. That is the impersonal
manifestation. Then, we will not get practice of "sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ". You
know. That will lead to:

        kleśo ’dhika-taras teṣām

That will lead to misery and frustration as is discussed in the Twelfth Chapter.
So, now, Krishna will start speaking. Let us look at it.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ
        dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama
        devā apy asya rūpasya
        nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ

So, "su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ". "idaṁ rūpaṁ". This form. What is the nature of
that form? "su-durdarśam". It is extremely difficult to see. "su-durdarśam idaṁ
rūpaṁ". And what kind of? "dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama". As you are see..., as you
have seen Me. As you are seeing Me. It is extremely rare to see. "devā apy asya
rūpasya". Even the Gods are "nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ". They are constantly
aspiing to see this form. "nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ". So, what happens?
"su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ". You know. What is He telling over here? That, you
know, you know, you know, this is very, very difficult to see. You know. We see
in the Tenth Canto that before Krishna was to appear, at that time, when He was
in the womb, the devatas came and started offering prayers. And all the devatas
are offering prayers because they are all recognising that Krshna is the eternal
transcendental Lord. You know. They know that Vishnu, you know, is the person to
whom they pray. And now, Vishnu has said that I will appear. And then, here,
accordingly, according to that proph..., you know, prophecy, here, the Lord has
appeared. But when Krishna appears, even they are surprised. That is how Brahma
gets bewildered. That is how Indra gets bewildered. How does that happen?
Because even they have not seen such, this form. You know. Generally, you know,
the devatas, so, this is the, the, below is the lower planetary systems. And the
middle is earthly. And then, above is heavenly. And then, above that is, you
know, the "Kshir Sagar". Where there is Vishnu residing. And then, beyond that
is the spiritual world. So, normally, the devatas go to the "Kshir Sagar". And
there, they do not even see Vishnu. They just pray to Vishnu. And then, Vishnu
responds. Generally, you know, by giving a message in the heart of Brahma. You
know. So, you know, the devatas do not get to see Vishnu, also, regularly.
Although, Vishnu of course comes sometimes. Sometimes means, whenever the
Vishn..., whenever Vishnu is to perform some, you know, assist the devatas. So,
Vishnu may come and attack, fight on behalf, behalf of the devatas. But
generally, also, Vishnu does not, is not seen. Seeing Vishnu is recent. Rarely,
it happens. But seeing Krishna is very rare. And that is why He is saying,
"devā apy asya rūpasya". "asya rūpasya". This form. "devā" is also "nityaṁ
darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ". They are constantly desiring to see it. You know. So, now,
Prabhupada basically explains in the purport that it is only by opening up
spiritual eyes that we can see the Lord. It is not by any ordinary means. Now,
Krishna will go on by describing this. So, now, 52nd verse, He said has that
this is very difficult to see. Even devatas are hankering to see it. Now, then,
53rd verse, He will describe what are all the ways by which one cannot see Him.
When we say it is something very difficult to achieve. Then, you know, we will
say, you know, ok, suppose, you want to say that, if you want to go to
Badrinath. It is very difficult to go there. Then, we may say, oh, actually, you
cannot go there by plane. Then, you can say, you cannot go there by train. Then,
you can say, you cannot go there by car. You cannot go there by boat, also.
Then, how do you go? Because you will have to walk all the way to the top. Oh,
really? That you understand then. So, normally, when you want to say, something is
difficult, we will give a, cannot go, do this. You cannot go this way. You
cannot go this way. You cannot go this way. You cannot go this way. So, like
that, when Krishna says, it is very difficult to know Him. First, in 53rd verse,
He tells, what are all the ways by which we cannot go there. Now, of course,
some parts of Badrinath may be accessible now. But there are some parts of Guru
Badrinath, that are very remote. And then, we just have to walk up there, only.
So, the point is an exam..., this is an example which is meant to illustrate a
particular point. So, now, Krishna will describe what are the ways in which one
cannot know Him. So, 11.53:

        nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā
        na dānena na cejyayā
        śakya evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ
        dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā

So, "nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā". "nāhaṁ vedair". Not by study of the Vedas. Not by
"tapasā". "na dānena". Not by giving charity. "na cejyayā". Not by worship. By
none of these can I be known. So, then, how can I be known? So, f..., by, not by
study of the Vedas. These four ways, he is saying, not by known, you know, what,
what happens by, exactly? What cannot be done, that is not being even told over
here. How He can be known, He will, told in the next verse. "śakya evaṁ-vidho
draṣṭuṁ". Is it possible? "evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ". "evaṁ-vidho" means like now,
like you are seeing Me now. "dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā". As you are seeing Me now.
So, now, it is very significant that the impersonalists want to say that,
actually, there is some higher reality beyond Krishna. And that is what we have
to go to. But Krishna is very clearly saying, "māṁ yathā". Seeing Me is very
rare. The impersonalists say, oh, actually, when you are less intelligent, you
can think of a form. And then, when you become more intelligent, then you go
beyond the form. But then, Krishna is telling that, actually, seeing this form
itself is rare. It is not that He is saying that, ok, this seeing the form is
for common people. And going beyond the form is rare. He does not say that. It
is, it is saying that it is so rare by that, by this normal Vedic process of
elevation. One cannot get to see it. So, Vedic process of elevation generally
give punya. And take one to Svarga. But they cannot take one beyond. So, Kri...,
these are the, you know, four things. "nāhaṁ vedair". "vedair" means the study
of the Vedas. So, the recitation of the Vedas. The memorisation of the Vedas.
"nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā". Somebody may do a lot of austerities. You know. By
willpower. We know the pastime of the milk-drinking brahmacari. In
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You know. It is just taking only milk. But what happened
was that, "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu" said you cannot just, you know, obtain the
Supreme Lord by austerity. You know. You know. Or just by drinking milk. By
doing austerity like that. He says, you require pure devotion for that. So, "na
tapasā". "nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā". "nāhaṁ vedair", we see the example that, you
know, there are many examples of people who are Vedic pandits. We have the
example of "Keshav Kashmiri" in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". Very learnt in the Vedas.
But still, he did not understand what the ultimate goal of life is.

        nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā
        na dānena na cejyayā

"na dānena". So, you know, "na dānena" refers to those who give charity. Now,
you know, you know, the point, giving charity is good. But that does not
necessarily prove anything. That that does not necessarily prove that this, you
know, this charity is necessarily transcendental. You know. Charity is in
goodness. But we cannot know the Supreme Lord by goodness. You know.
Harishchandra is a famous king in the Vedic culture. Who is glorified for his
truthfulness. But that does not ma..., make him automatically transcendental. Or
spiritual. So, people may give a lot of charity. But cha..., by charity alone,
one cannot know the Lord. So, you know, you know, you know, then, "ca",
"ijyayā". "ijyayā" means worship. So, now, the word "ijyayā" can refer to deity
worship. But norm..., in this context, in the Vedic context, "ijyayā" refers to
fire sacrifices. By worship. So, actually, when the sacred fire comes. When the
brahmana is chanting mantras. And they are offering "āhuti". Then, that is
"ijyayā". They are doing worship of Vishnu. Who is manifesting his mouth, you
know, through Agni. So, Agni Deva is manifesting. And Agni Deva is accepting the
sacrifices. And those sacrifices are going to all the, you know, devatas through
him. "na cejyayā". So, even the, by that, we cannot know. And that we see in the
pastime of the yajnic brahmanas. Their wives, they were able to see. You know.
Their wives were able to see wat? That, you know, you know, you know, their
wives were able to see that, they, you know, you know, this is the Supreme Lord.
And we should go to Him. And in fact, they did not even think so much that He is
the Supreme Lord. Oh, it is Krishna. He is the Lord of our heart. Let us go to
Him. But when they saw this, you know, their husbands. They thought, you know,
we are performing big, the sacr..., big sacrifice. What are these children doing
over here? Get out of the way. They did not, actually, that they did not even
say get out of the way. They just neglected them completely. It is quite
impersonal. And quite dehumanising to neglect a person like that. So, "dṛṣṭavān
asi māṁ yathā". So, how can you know? You cannot know Me by any of these means.
So, actually, when Krishna says, you know, "dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā". You cannot
see Me. So, seeing is not just literally seeing. You know. In the, you know,
pastime of Mukunda, you know, you know, when, you know, "Chaitanya Maha...",
there is a long pastime. Most of you will probably be knowing it. That he was
having some association with mayavada. And then, "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu" got very
angry because of that. And "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu" said you will not be able to
see Me for ten million lifetimes. And he started danc..., first, "Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu" said, take him out of my association. Never bring him back. And
then, he is, they say that, 31:08
