Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iw_OcoyojJg
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=iw_OcoyojJg&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_102_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_29_to_31_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=i0Z7X2K-zbznZgD4uxdJP1iekOB8MTU0ODQ4ODgzNUAxNTQ4NDAyNDM1

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are going to go to the last part of the Ninth Chapter. So, in this chapter,
basically, Krishna first talks about His glory in terms of how, you know, He is
the controller of the material world. And how, and then, He moves on to focusing
on, you know, pure devotional service. "kevala-bhakti". And He says, talks about
different people how they understand Him differently. And what are the
consequences of those different kinds of understandings. And then, Krishna talks
about, primarily, you know, pure devotional service. That is what we will discuss
in this section. 29 to 34. But before that, let us have a quick overview of
the thoughts that are happ..., thoughts that are going on in this verse. In
this, previous section. And how they are leading up to the glorification of, you
know, "kevala-bhakti". So, from 20 to 24, what was happening? First, 20 said,
demigod worshippers also worship Me. That was the point.

        trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā
        yajñair iṣṭvā ...

So, "yajñair iṣṭvā" is "māṁ". They are worshipping Me, only. But, you know,
demigod worshipper, de..., fall down. And lose whatever they have gained. That is
the next verse. So, they are worshipping Krishna, only. But because they are
worshipping indirectly. You know. You know. So, that point will come explicitly
more later. Then, 22nd verse says, those who worship me indistract...,
undistractedly never lose anything. So, then, the question may come up that if
the demigod worshippers are also worshipping Krishna. Then, why the difference
between what demigod worshippers get and what Krishna, what the, you know, the
pure devotees get? Why this difference between demigod worshippers? When demigod
worshippers are also worshipping You? That question is answered here. 23rd
verse. Demigod worship Me. But in an authorised way. Unauthorised way. So, what
exactly is that which is unauthorised? They do not know Me as the supreme "yajna
bhotka" and "prabhu"? And, you know, you know, and then, then, that means
depending on what people's conceptions are, they will get the results. So,
different worshippers get different destinations. So, here, you know, Krishna is
slowly, but surely, taking points ahead. And establishing the primacy of pure
devotional service. Now, we will see that, in that, with respect to demigod
worship. Hmm. We will see that, Srila Prabhupada in general within ISKCON did
not, you know, encourage demigod worship. Even when Rupa Goswami says that a
bhakta can do Ganesh puja. When Prabhupada, Prabhupada put, translated that in
his "Nectar of Devotion", also. But when a devotee asked whether we should do
Ganesh puja, Prabhupada said that, yes, you know, Prabhupada gave him, if every
month, you give me a huge amount. Something Prabhupada said. The point was that
Prabhupada did not want, you know, that sort of contamination to come in. So, if
we look over the centuries, you know, we will see different conceptions.
Or different attitudes towards demigod worship. So, let us look at it. And let
us try to understand the context. So, you know, you know, in the "Mahābhārata",
we will see that, you know, Drupada worships Shiva. Arjuna worships Devi. You
know. When this Drupada worships Shiva, actually, there are many occasions, when
the, you know, the actually, to get a, Draupadi and Dhrishtadyumna as his son
and daughter. You know. Daughter and son. Drupada worships Shiva. And actually
Arjuna, you know, does not exactly worship in terms of Me accepting them as the
Supreme Lord. But he also worships the devatas to get weapons from them. He does
tapasya to please Shiva. Then, you know, just, you know, before the "Kurukṣetra"
war starts. You know. Then, Krishna tells the, the, g..., Arjuna that, you know,
you should take the blessings of Devi. Because she is the goddess in charge of
material nature. And with her blessings, you will attain success. So, you know,
Arjuna gets off his chariot. And prays to Devi. And then, when he prays to Devi,
what happens? Devi appears. And she says, your victory is guaranteed. Because
Keshava is with you. Wherever He is, there will be victory. Because He is the
Lord of the goddess of fortune. So, you know, now, you know, you know, why is
this kind of demigod worship talked about in the scriptures? You know. It is not
that demigod worship is sinful. Or it is wrong. The point is, the, the book,
every book has a particular focus. So, the focus of Mahabharata is primarily
karma-kanda. Although, it also talks about pure devotional service. But that is
not its focus. And largely, it focuses on talking about, you know, not bhakti.
But, you know, karma-kanda. And of course, the Lord and His devotees, their pure
reciprocation is also there within it. But that is not the overall, you know,
tone of the book. So, therefore, in karma-kanda, worship of the demigods is
talked about. And that is why it is included in the Mahabharata. Now, if we
loo..., moved on from five thousand years ago to around thousand years ago. What
do we see? We see Rāmānujācārya. Rāmānu..., Rāmān..., Ra... in Rāmānujācārya's
times, he considered that it is unchastity, you know, to worship the devatas.

So, for example, in the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", there is a story based on one of
the biographies of Rāmānujācārya. That one night Rāmānujācārya slept. And, you
know, he, he, it is a long story. But basically, what happened was that He was
in Puri. And he did not like the fact that the dresses of Jagannath, the
starch had not been removed from them. So, then he, you know, you know, pointed
it out to the pujaris. But Lord Jagannath did not like this. And, he is, you
know, worshippers being, His Pandavas being chast..., you know, being, you
know, you know, criticised like this. So, in His sleep, only, Lord Jagannath
gave him a sort of blow. And when Rāmānujācārya woke up. He found himself not in
Puri. But in some other place. And he found him a temp..., self in a temple. And
he thought that the temple is a Shiva temple. And it is a Shiva Linga. So,
thinking that, how did I get there? He felt. He started fasting. He said. No.
No. And how did I end up in a Shiva linga? But then later on, he found
it was his Kurma temple. And it was Kurmakshetra. But the point is, the idea
the, which the, you know, many Rāmānujācārya, its, have, today, also. You know.
The justice of wife will serve her husband. And not other people. Not other men.
Similarly, a worshipper should serve only the Supreme Lord. And not other
devatas. So, Rāmānujācārya discouraged it. What about Caitanya Mahaprabhu? When
you say the word Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He, He said it is ok. You know. Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, He would travel around. He would actually take. He would not go to
Shiva temples. For example, when He went to its Puri. He went to the
Bhubhaneshwar temple. And there, He danced in for Lord Shiva. And in Murari
Gupta's book, "Caitanya Carita". There is the description of "Sri Sivastakam"
which Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had composed. And in this "Sri Sivastakam", you
know, you know, Lord Caitanya glorifies Lord Shiva as a great Vaishnava. As
among the greatest Vaishnavas. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's attitude was, yes, you
know, Kri..., there is nothing wrong in worshipping the devatas. If one
understands that they are devotees. Now, there are other pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, also. Where, He, when people were, h..., having
incorrect understandings. And they were doing improper worship. Then, Caitanya
Mahaprabhu strongly disapproved it. So, for example, when there was a
brahman, Gopal Chapal. Who tried to frame "Śrīvāsa Thakura". As if "Śrīvāsa
Thakura" had been worshipping, you know, goddess, the goddess. And he had, you
know, the paraphernalia assembled. Often, the paraphernalia was centered on, on
black magic. And things like that. Tamasic paraphernalia for her worship. So,
when, you know, that wa..., when that was placed in front of the door of
"Śrīvāsa Thakura". And Gopal Chapal tried to ply..., frame "Śrīvāsa Thakura"
like that. Then, Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very displeased. And Gopal Chapal
actually, you know, you know, got lepracy. And for as a consequence for his
offenses. And Caitanya Mahaprabhu attained. And for Caitanya Mahaprabhu, of
course, forgive him. When he begged forgiveness. But after, he had to suffer for
it. You know. You know. Suffer for the consequences of that misdeed. So, the
point is that Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He focused on pure devotional service. But He
did not reject the Vedic culture that was there. He integrated that Vedic
culture into a devotional context. You know. Into the proper devotional
understanding. So, it is not that we consider devatas to be compete..., you
know, to be, you know, competitors to the Supreme Lord. In the judeo-christian
tradition, they have the conception that we are monotheistic. Whereas hindus are
polytheistic. So, we hindus worship only one God, we, we, Christians worship
only one God. And even, you know, Islam is also aggressively monotheistic. So,
but, they consider the hindus to be polytheistic. Actually, the variou..., the
Vedic culture is not polytheistic. The Vedic culture is monotheistic. But there
is multilevel monotheism. Multilevel monotheism means, there is a one Absolute
Truth who manifests at different levels. And in different ways. And allows
people to worship accordingly. Monotheism means there is one God. Polytheism
means there are many Gods. You know. So, the word God, especially in plural.
Gods. It is, when it is used in the Vedic context. And when it is used in the,
you know, context of the other religions have different meanings.

For example, if we look at the history, say, described in the old testament. Or
even des..., what is described in the, you know, you know, Quran. Or in the
associated literature along these religions. Judaism. Christianity. Islam.
Whenever the ruling religion, the ruling religious head would conquer a kingdom.
You know. What, you know, you know, the first thing that they would do is, that
they would go, for example, when Muhammad conquered, you know, you know, Mecca.
After he came from Medina. And conquered Mecca. The first thing that he did was,
he bashed up. He destroyed all the idols that were, have been worshipped over
there. So, the idea was, all false Gods have to be rejected. And destroyed.
So that the glory of the true God can be established. So, their idea is that
there is only one true God. And other Gods are false Gods. What is the idea of
false God? False God means, they are imaginary. And th..., th..., they are
tempta..., they are actually temptations. They are actually manifestations of
the devil. The devil wants to distract people away from God. And these Go...,
false Gods are manifestations of the devil. They are created by the arrangement
of the devil to d..., distract people away from the true God. So, by destroying
those false Gods, we help in establishing the glory of the true God. So, the
Vedic culture does not talk about false Gods. And true Gods. You know. It talks
about God. And demigods. Prabhupada used the word demigods for the word
"devata". So, God means that the Supreme Being. Demi, the word pre..., the
prefix demi is like the prefix semi. It means partial. Like we have a circle.
And semicircle. So, God and demigod. So, demigod means that those beings who
have pow..., padma, partial powers of God. Not the full power. So, that is one
Supreme Being. And the demigod have, they are more powerful than us. But they do
not have as much power as the Supreme Being. So, you know, you know, in today's
context, the philosophical understanding is very unclear. Of people. And people
think that ok, all Gods are same. All Gods are manifesting as the same Brahman.
And people do not understand this complex, and p..., and, and accommodating
system of multilevel monotheism. So, in order to avoid confusion, Srila
Prabhupada said that at least within the Krishna Consciousness movement, those
who are serious devotees, should not worship any of the other devatas. They
should focus on worship of Krishna. And that is what? The Bhagavad Gita is
ultimately teaching. And that is what the, you know, that is what the Bhagavatam
and Chaitanya Charitamrita ultimately teach. You know. So, we will see that, you
know, the devatas, the understanding is, you know, you know, that they are the
devotees of the Lord. And if somebody is very attached to worshipping them.
Then, one can worship them with the understanding that they are the devotees.
But in general, for those who are serious sadhakas:

        sadhaiva sarvahar hanam acutya ja

If one worships Lord Krishna. Acyuta. Then, there is, by worshipping Him,
and everyone else is worshipped. There is no need to worship anyone else. That
is the understanding. So, you know, you know, hmm, let us move, move forward.
Now, hmm, hmm, hmm, you know, we will look at one more point over here. That we
are not going to, little deeper into demigod worship. There are these concept
of propers nouns. And common nouns. So, Shiva for example is both a proper noun.
Referring to the person Shiva. And a common noun referring to the quality of
auspiciousness. So, what does it refer to over here? That, you know, the points
which I am rai..., raising over here is that sometimes, in Vishnu Sahasranama.
Shiva is also the name that is used to refer to Vishnu.

        Sarvah sarvah sivah sthanur-bhutadir-nidhir-avyayah

So, Shiva is also used to refer to Vishnu. So, why is it like that? What does it
imply actually? So, actually, Shiva, you know, can refer to a particular person.
Or Shiva can be referred to a particular quality. And whoever has that quality
can also be called as Shiva. So, when it is referring to a particular person. It
will be called as a proper noun. When it is referring to the, you know, quality,
then whoever has that quality can also be referred to as Lord Shiv..., as Shiva.
So, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, let us look at this point
clearly. As a common noun, as a common noun, Shiva can refer to the quality of
Vishnu. Who is "sarva-namavan". "sarva-namavan" means, all names ultimately
refer to Vishnu. That is how in Vishnu Sahasranama, you find the name Vishnu.
You know, when not, not only the name Vishnu. But also for the name Shiva. So,
if Shiva is chanted as a proper it will take us to "shiva-loka". Why? If chanted
as a proper noun means, ultimately:

        yānti deva-vratā devān

So, it depending on hom we remember, that is what we will attain. So, if we
worship Shiva, you know, because when we are chanting the name of Shiva. And if
you are thinking of Lord Shiva, the specific person who holds a "triśūla" in his
hand as a snake around his head. So, if we are referring to that particular
person, then naturally, we are referring to that person, we will go to that
person's abode. So, if Shiva is chanted as a proper noun. Om Namah Shivaya. For
example. Then, with a particular conception of a particular deity in mind.
Then, one will go to the abode of that particular deity. But if, you know, you
know, one is primarily chanting the names of Lord Vishnu. Or Lord Krishna. And
within that, one chants the name of the Lord Shiva. So, if Shiva is chanted as a
common name, a noun, referring to Vishnu's qualities. Then, it is a part of
bhakti yoga that will take us back to Godhead. So, if Shiva is chanted as a
proper, common noun. So, this is a little technical concept. The concept of
proper noun. And common noun. But the point of this is that we have to
understand that, you know, names have implications. And we have to understand
those implications properly. So, let us look at this. There are names. And there
are conceptions. You know. So, you know, now, when there is a right name. And
right conception. That means one who chants the names of Krishna. And one has
the, so, right name. And right conception. And ch..., one, say, understands
that Krishna is the Supreme Lord. And one will go back to Godhead. So, then, on
the other hand, if one has the right, chants, the right name, but has the wrong
conception. This is described in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", "Antya-līlā". That there was
this person Ramadas Vishvas who seemed to be a great devotee of Lord Rama. You
know. And he was constantly chanting the names of Lord Rama. But, you know,
while chanting the names of Lord Rama, he was, you know, having the conception
that one day I will become Rama. So, he was Gopala Bhatta Goswami in Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, when, you know, he, when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu went. Both of them.
Gopala Bhatta Goswami, Ramadas Bhisvas were traveling together. So, Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu paid, you know, no attention to Ramadas Bhisvas. And then, Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu later revealed His inner mind, te..., mentality which had owned the
disapproval of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So, that is, so, such names, such, you
know, chanting of the names, you know, which is, with the wrong conception. That
will not lead to the desired result. So, "Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura" t..., says the
chanting of the na..., holy name of the mayavadis is:

        pratibimba namabhasa

"pratibimba namabhasa" means. "namabhasa" is like the rising of the Sun. But
"pratibimba namabhasa" means the Sun is rising, and we see the Sun rise in the
reflection. Then, we cannot get it, much, much warm from it. And further, if we
have wrong name. But right conception. So, it will lead to spiritual
advancement. Wrong names, you know, if there are non-Vedic names in vernacular
languages. So, for example, we have the name, say, Allah. Or Yahweh. Jevova. So,
these are the names of God. Now, we may not find them in any Vishnu Sahasranama.
Or any list like that. But that does not mean that those nom..., chanting of
those names will not purify. Because ultimately, chanting of the names of God is
meant to help us remember God. And we remember God through His personal
characteristics. Based on His pastimes. And we also remember God based on his,
you know, generic characteristics as the Supreme Being. So, when we remember the
Lord based on His generic characteristics, that also leads to purification. That
is what is being talked about over here. So, when somebody chants the wrong name,
apparently, so, it is not that actually, wrong name. Because one is having
conception correct. That this is the Supreme Being that we are referring to. So,
if we look at the conception of the Absolute Truth that is based in the Bible.
So, you know, the supreme, one Supreme Being. The broad generic characteristics
are similar to what are talked about as a characteristic, the Absolute Truth.
So, in that sense, you know, it will also lead to spiritual advancement. That is
why Prabhupada would say that any bonafide name of God, if one chants, one will
become purified by that. And then, on the other hand, if one chants the wrong
name with the wrong conception. You know. Wrong name with the wrong conception.
Then, we have 9.12. It is said.

        moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo
        mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ

So, what does this refer to? Wrong name? Wrong conception? Actually, you know,
you know, nowadays, there are many self-proclaimed Gods. People who claim to be
God. And their worship. their followers. Sometimes, they may have thousands of
followers. Even millions of followers. And their worshippers worship them as if
they are God, only. And there are even for these people, people have made
"Sahasranama". Or "Satanama". You can have so and so Baba Satanam. So and so
Baba Sahasranama. Now, when people chant those names. Actually, that particular
is not God. So, that person is not God. And that person's name is not God's
name. And that person is, so, that means there is a wrong name that is being
referred to. If that na..., that person's name is being chanted. And it is
chanted with the wrong conception. So, wrong name and wrong conception cannot
lead to the right results. So, "mogha". Ultimately, it will lead to futility.
So, we are trying to understand here, what are the different ways in which
"avidhi-pūrvakam" can happen. So, there are many ways in which it can happen.
You know. So, let us look at the various ways in which people can understand
demigod worship. So, one of the possible conceptions of demigod worship. So, one
is that the demigod is the Absolute Truth. That there is no difference between
the demigod and the Supreme Lord. You know. So, you know, you know, you know, is
to Indra, you know, Rudhra:

        indra vidh rudhradi devatam

You know. So, these are, there is a verse in the Purana which says that.
Actually:

        samathven eva vikshet sa pashandhi bavidhruha

So, if one considered the devatas to be equal to Lord Vishnu, such a person is
"pashandi". And, you know, hmm, such a person is, the conception is completely
rejected. As wrong. Now, you know, they are currently, then, then, the populist,
popular hindu idea today. Hindu karma-kandi idea is what? Demigod is one among
many Gods. With no one as Supreme. That is the hindu karma-kandi idea. You know.
You know. Which is also false. Because there has to be one Supreme, ultimately.
It is not that the, all these Gods are constantly and eternally fighting. Then,
there is demigod is a symbol of Brahman. That is what is talked about in
"pṛthaktvena bahudhā". That means there is an impersonal Absolute Truth. And
from that Absolute Truth, you know, you know, you know, people can ascribe names
and forms of, for the sake of concept... you know, for the sake of, you know,
you know, what the im..., mayavadis called as con..., convenient fiction. Why is
that? Conceptual meditational tool. So, you can ascribe whichever form you like.
And then, you can worship that form as your "iṣṭa-devatā". And ultimately, you
will go beyond that form. So, you know, you know, that, that is, of course, a
complex, you know, misconception. But the essential point is, now, here, if they
are not offensive to the Supreme Lord. Then, that is not mayavada. If they are
offensive to Supreme Lord, then it becomes mayavada. And then, if they see it
demigod is a representative and devotee of Krishna. Then, you know, then that
can, that is con..., included within the realm of devotional service itself.
The gopis worship in Katyayani so that they can get, you know, the, you know,
you know, Lord, get her blessings by which they hope to get Lord, the Lord as
their husband. Lord Krishna as their husband. You know. You know. So, actually,
when the gopis worship Katyayani, he, now, we may wonder, the gopis are
considered to be topmost devotees. And they know no one, but Krishna. You know.
Then, why would they worship, you know, you know, Katyayani? Here, the idea is
that, you know, you know, when a devotee is so intensely desirous of the Lord.
You know. And Lord's mercy. Lord's association. Then, you know, the devotee
adopts any and every measure possible to gain the Lord's association. So, the
gopis, with, they are living in a particular culture where, you know, you know,
you know, they are women in society. And they cannot just approach directly
Krishna. At the same time, they want to attain Krishna. So, the, within their
cultural context, how they demonstrate their intense desire? By doing the
Katyayani vrata. So, now, Ananda Vrindavan Champu by Kavi Karnapura describes
that, actually, the gopis who did this Katyayani vrata, you know, the, Radharani
was not among them. Radharani was a worshipper of Lord Shi..., she wor..., she
worshipped Lord Shiva.

        padma-bandhu-rādhikā

The Radhikastakam says. So, you know, these were padma and other sakhis who were
unmarried. And, you know, you know, they worshipped Katyayani. And then,
eventually, Krishna went and, you know, fulfilled the desires of the, towards
end of vrata. When He, you know, you know, took away their garments and then
returned them. So, garments. So, actually, that is not a dhusana. That is a
bhusana. It is not a contamination. It is an ornament. Why? Because, you know,
you know, actually, it ind..., demonstrates the intensity. The desperation. The
absolute, you know, w..., single-mindedness of their desire to attain the Lord.
And their willingness to adopt any and every measure to get the, gain the Lord.
So, that is indicated by their worship of the devatas. Like, you know, the
worship of Kat..., the gopis' worship of Katyayani. So, now, this is not
considered at all a contamination. And that is how, you know, so, now,
Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura makes a very interesting point about demigod
worship. So, he, you know, you know, raises this question that, you know,
act..., actually, you know, everybody is worshipping Krishna. So, does all the
worship go to Krishna? He says, yes, all worship goes to Krishna. But all
worshippers do not go to Krishna. What is the difference between worship and
worshippers? So, he says that, just as, you know, when water is offered into a
river. The water itself will go to the ocean. But that does not mean that the
worshipper goes to the ocean. Now, pers..., sorry, the person who water, offers
the water goes to the ocean. So, you know, there is that, you know, there is
that "Subhashita". Which says that:

        Akashat patitam toyam sagaram prati gacchati,
        sarva deva namaskaram ...

You know. You know. You know. Similar, "acyuta para chaksurum". It is, actually,
it reaches Acyuta. So, what they say is that, just as a drop of water falls from
the ocean. From the sky. It ultimately reaches the ocean. Similarly, whichever
devata one worships, ultimately, that reaches Lord, you know, Vish..., you know,
Acyu..., you know:

       Keshavam prati gacchati

Sorry, not Acyuta. "Keshavam prati gacchati". It goes to Keshava. So, actually,
this verse, you know, now, you know, it is, it is at a level of, you know,
karma-kanda. And, you know, it is a, essentially not a, you know, not
inaccurate. But it is not completely accurate. And it is mis..., it is
interpreted in a way that is definitely not accurate. It is not meant to say
that actually all worship is the same level. Yes, all worship will ultimat...,
may ultimately reach Keshava. But do all worshippers reach Keshava? No. Because
the worshippers will go wh..., wh..., where their conceptions are based. And
where their aspirations are driving them. So, if somebody is w..., you know,
worshipping Shiva, that person cannot go to, you know, that p..., if somebody
is worshipping Durga. Or somebody is worshipping Indra. That person cannot go to
Vishnu. And that is clearly brought about in 9.25. So, their, you know, actually
speaking, so, 9.25A. "yānti deva-vratā devān". Those who worship the devatas,
they will go to the devatas. That is talking about worship in the mood of
goodness. Then, "pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ". Those who worship the, you know,
"pitṛ"s go to the "pitṛ"s. That is talking more about the, you know, more about
those in passion. And "bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā". So, those who worship the ghosts
and spirits, that is tamasic worship. They will go and according to that
destination. And the D part of that verse is "yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām". Those
who worship Me will return to Me. Now, you know, now, let us look at, this is a
little technical point now. You know. We will go back to 9.27 to understand what
is happening here. So, 9.27 was that whatever a person, whatevery you do, you
know:

        yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi
        yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat
        yat tapasyasi kaunteya
        tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

So, you know, now, you know, at this point, we have completed our discussion on
demigod worship. And now, we are looking at, you know, various levels of worship
of Krishna. Very, where, various levels of devotional service. So, here, Krishna
is, what is He d..., you know, telling? That whatever you do, you offer it to
Me. So, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura explains in his commentary that what is
the level of this? "Karma-Jnana-Mishra-Pradhani Bhuta Bhakti". So, it is a
technical name. But we can try to understand. Not very complicated. So, you
remember, we have discussed "Pradhani Bhuta". "Pradhani Bhuta" means the
material component is more in that bhakti. So, you know,
"Karma-Jnana-Mishra-Pradhani Bhuta Bhakti". So, let us look at it. You know. So,
he say..., he, why does he put it in this particular category? He explains
several reasons for that. So, it is not sakama bhakti. Because there are no
material desires. "yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi yaj juhoṣi". That verse does not talk
about any material desires. You know. That, that we fulfill by that worship. So,
it is not sakama. And it is not karma-yoga. He explains. Why? Because all
activities are offered. Not just the scripturally prescribed ones. You know.
What does this mean? It means that all activities are offered. So, actually,
they, in the, you know, in karma-yoga, you know, the focus is on o..., offering
the prescribed activities. Not all activities. Whereas in bhakti-yoga, one
offers all activities. For, you know, whatever one does, one tries to offer to
the Supreme Lord. You know. You know. You know. And it is not jnana-yoga, he
explains. Because abundant appreciation of the Lord's personal feature is
present. It is jnana-yoga. In jnana-yoga, one focuses more on the impersonal
conception of the Absolute Truth. And not the personal conception. So, when, you
know, you know, adequate appreciation of the Lord's personal feature is present,
then that is jnana-yoga. That is not, that is not jnana-yoga. And then, you
know, you know, it is not kevala bhakti. Because ul..., because the actions are
offered after performance. Not before performance. So, what does it mean?
Actually, if we look at the progression of this verse:

        yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi
        yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

That whatever one is doing, that, that means one is doing various things. "tat
kuruṣva". So, after doing the activities. "tat kuruṣva". Offered to the Lord.
So, a higher level is that first one offers to the Lord. And does, then does the
activities. What does that mean, you know, first and after? Is it a matter just
of timing? No. It is not a matter of, just of timing. It is a matter of, also
of, of, you know, attachment. Of understanding. So, if one is attached to the
Supreme Lord. Then, one thinks first. Ok. What will please the Lord? And one
will want to do that. On the other hand, if one is not all that attached to the
Lord. Then, one is attached to what one wants to do. So, one will do what one
wants to do. And then, offer that to the Lord. So, it is not, a ke..., in
kevala bhakti, one is attached to the Lord. And wants to do whatever will please
the Lord. So, therefore, this is not kevala bhakti. You know. And it is, at one
level, lower. So, Prabhu..., here, Prabhupada quotes from the "Bhāgavatam", here.
7.5.24 that "iti puṁ...", not Prabhupada. Sorry. Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura
quote..., quotes over here:

        iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau
        bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

This is the second part of the verse, famous verse:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

So, that first part of the verse is what we normally quote. And that describes
the nine limbs of bhakti. You know. You know. So, after describing those nine
limbs.

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
        sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

After describing them, then "iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau". "iti". These activities.
"puṁsārpitā viṣṇau". When they are up..., offered to Vishnu. "bhaktiś cen
nava-lakṣaṇā". You know. They are characterised as bhakti. So, all these
activities are directly connected to the Lord. And they are done for the
pleasure of the Lord. So, Bhakt..., now, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura gives
often quite a bit of a technical classification in his verses. And he emphasises
through all these that actually, ultimately, it is the Supreme Lord who is to be
worshipped. No one else. So, you know, we have discussed this of, earlier. You
know. There is a Pradhani bhuta bhakti. You know. You know. So, Pradhani bhuta
means mixture of bhakti and other processes. With bhakti, greater than 20%. So,
if it is, you know, "Karma mishra pradhani bhuta" bhakti means, mixture of
bhakti and other processes. Bhakti is greater than 50%. Other part is karma. So,
Pradhani bhuta means, bhakti more than 20%. Whatever else might be there. So,
"Karma mishra pradhani bhuta" means karma will be the remaining component.
"Karma jnana mishra" would mean that karma and jnana both are there as
components. So, now, let us look at the overall flow of this chapter. And try to
understand how the, this chapter is describing the most confidential knowledge.
How it is talking about the glories of bhakti in five distinctive ways. We have
discussed three of them till now. You know. And we will discuss the remaining
two now. After this. So, in terms of destination. You know. You know. You know.
"yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham". That is 9.22. That is talked about. It along use the
highest desti..., eternal destination. Other forms of worship do not give
eternal destination. In terms of possession. Possession means what, what one
owns. It does not need fancy material assets. It does not need anything very
fanciful. "patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ". You know. And then, devotional
qualification. Actually, "yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi". And "śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ".
That indicate that can be performed even by those who are not pure-hearted. And
then, with respect to deviation, can redeem even if the performer sins. This is
referring to occasional or incidental faults. This is "api cet su-durācāro". And
"kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā". Which we will discuss now. And then, in terms of
you know, you know, you know, you know, material qualification, it can elevate.
It can uplift higher than what karma-kanda elevates. Those who are not qualified
even for "karma-marga". You know. You know. Inherent. So, that means it removes
the inherent faults of the people, also. So, we will discuss these two points
once again what this means. In the next verse, He will say that even those who
are lowborn can become elevated. You know. You know. So, before we move onto
that now, about the various ways in which bhakti can elevate, let us look at
what Krishna is telling now in the verses which build up to that. So, first, He
says, in se..., 9.29.

        samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu
        na me dveṣyo ’sti na priyaḥ
        ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā
        mayi te teṣu cāpy aham

"samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu". That, actually, you know, "samo ’haṁ". I am equal to
all living beings. "na me dveṣyo ’sti na priyaḥ". That I am not en..., jealous,
you know, envious of anyone. Nor am I, nor is anyone specifically dear to Me.
But after describing this, Krishna is saying, next part, "ye bhajanti tu māṁ
bhaktyā". Those who worship Me, what happens to them? "mayi te teṣu cāpy aham".
They are in Me. And I am in them. They are in Me. And I am in them. It is a
very, you know, you know, endearing declaration of a very intimate connection by
the Lord. "mayi te". You know. They are in Me. You know. They, "teṣu cāpy aham".
And I am in them. You know. You know. You know. So, the Lord, generally
speaking, you know, He, in the Bhagavad Gita, does not talk about endearments
like this too frequently. So, when He talks about it, it is, it is significant.
So, He is telling that, He is actually impartial. That is what He details in the
first two parts. First two lines. You know. So, A and B.

        samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu
        na me dveṣyo ’sti na priyaḥ

That He is impartial. And now, after that, He says, no, I am partial. "ye
bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā". Those who worship Me. "mayi te teṣu cāpy aham". They
are in Me. And I am in them. That means we are very intimately connected. So,
this sort of description may seem contradictory, but is not contradictory. It
depends on which level of the manifestations of the Lord is being talked about.
You know. So, "samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu", this is referring to the Lord as a, you
know, judge. So, ju..., as a judg..., a judge, that person is not partial.
Naturally, if, whoever, whatever, a person is, you know, destined to get.
Whatever is entitled to get based on one's actions. That person gets. And the
judge gives accordingly. So, the judge is not partial. "samo ’haṁ
sarva-bhūteṣu". But then, "ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā". But those who worship
Me, what happens to them? Krishna says I am partial. So, that is, this second,
the D, C and D parts of this verse are referring to the Bhagavan aspect. And the
Bhagavan aspect is a very intimate aspect. It is a very elevated and exalted
a..., you know, manifestation of the Absolute Truth. And the Bhagavan aspect,
what does He focus on? He focuses on the principle of pure devotional service.
And wherever he sees that, that Bhagavan aspect, embraces that person. So,
Krishna is impartially partial. You know. We may, how is that possible? Isn't
that oxymoron? Oxymoron means, contradictory words brought together. So, how can
somebody be impartially partial? So, what it means essentially is that,
actually, Krishna is partial. Definitely, He is partial to His devotees.
Prabhupada says that a charitable person may be charitable to all people. But
then, is very, is naturally more affectionate to His own children. That is
no..., not, considered a fault. So, similarly, it is not considered a fault that
the Lord loves His devotees. Who are like His own children. As compared to all
other living beings. Who are also other, who, who are also existing in the
existence. Now, you know, actually, all living beings are His children. But some
are His obedient and loving children. And o..., so..., others are His defiant
and even hateful children. So, the Lord, you know, offers His care to everyone.
But the intimacy of the relationship is not possible for everyone. So, the Lord,
that is possible for those who try to reconnect with God. So, Krishna is
impartially partial means, that He is impartial in terms of opening the doors
for everyone to receive the benefits of His partiality. I will repeat. What I
mean is, Krishna is, how is Krishna impartially partial? He is impartial in
opening the doors to everyone for receiving and benefiting from His partiality.
So, you know, the point is that the Lord, you know, cares for everyone. And He
especially cares for those who love Him. So, that is why this verse is a glimpse
into the heart of the Lord. And after describing in this verse, you know, so,
Prabhupada explains in the purport that there is:

"The Lord and the living entity eternally glitter, and when a living entity
becomes inclined to the service of the Supreme Lord he looks like gold. The Lord
is a diamond, and so this combination is very nice".

So, just a diamond in a gold, you know, diamond in a sigil necklace, or rather,
gold in a dia..., gold along with a diamond will look very nice. Similarly, the
devotee and the Lord look very nice. And Prabhupada says that, you know, without
the principle of reciprocation, there is no personal s..., philosophy possible.
So, yes, there is the Lord. And there is a devotee. So, when Krishna, is He
partial? Or is He impartial? One way to understand it is that He is impartially
partial. He is partial to His devotees. You know. But He allows everyone to
become His devotees. And in that sense, He is impartially partial. Because He is
a loving everyone and everyone to become His devotees. And beyond that, He is
also reciprocal. Krishna is specifically neither partial, nor impartial. He is
reciprocal. Reciprocal means He allows those who wish to worship Him to worship
Him accordingly. And in whichever manifestation, they want to worship Him. You
know. You know. So, now, some time, now, Prabhupada here quotes Sridhar Swami,
here, quotes Chakravarti Thakura's purport. So, you know, the example is often
giv..., given that the Lord is like a desire tree. And whatever one wants from
this desire tree, the Lord supplies. So, Sridhar Swami 41:15
