Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fquJGQkMAU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_099_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_11_to_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=0fquJGQkMAU&redir_token=UprVZvbe6oGb2dUNH4GpPjRRIbd8MTU0ODQ4ODc1MEAxNTQ4NDAyMzUw

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the heart of the bhakti section. Ninth Chapter. The Most Conﬁdential
Knowledge. Krishna has talked about His supreme position with respect to the
material world in 9.10. And now, we will be talking about how different people
understand Krishna in different ways. Let us have a quick overview of the
chapter before we move ahead. So, first was developing kevala bhakti by
knowledge of Krishna. You know. Then, Krishna's inconceivable relationship with
the material world what, what we discussed about. Now, those who understand
Krishna in various ways. So, because Krishna's relationship is inconceivable, it
is not easy to understand. And that is why different people understand it
differently. So, 11 to 12 will talk about the impersonalists who mistake, you
know, Krishna's body to be material. 13 to 14 will talk about the kevala
bhaktas. And then, you know, 15, you know will talk about three types of people.
"ahangrahopasana"s. "pratikopasanas". "vishvarupa-upasana"s. And 16 to 19 will
elaborate on the "vishvarupa-upasana"s. Let us discuss them one by one. So, we
will move to verse 11.

        avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā
        mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam
        paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto
        mama bhūta-maheśvaram

So, here, Krishna is describing "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". The foolish people, you
know, cannot understand Me. They de..., Prabhupada translates "avajānanti" as
deride. So, they deride Me. What do they deride? "mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam". See, 
that, actually, He has descended by human form. So, here, the implication of
"mānuṣīṁ tanum" is, that they have descended in a form that is just like ours.
So, that means, they say that, actually, Krishna's form just like our form. It
is a human form. It is a material form. And they do not understand "paraṁ bhāvam
ajānanto". They do not understand the "paraṁ bhāvam". The transcendental nature.
What is the transcendental nature? "mama bhūta-maheśvaram". That I am the Lord
of all living bei..., of the, all of existence. "bhūta" is everything that is,
"bhūta" is generic for existence. "maheśvaram". So, you know, the word "maheś"
is sometimes used to refer to Lord Shiva. But actually, it is generic name.
"eśa" is controller. "maheśa" is the great controller. So, "maheśvaram" is the
great controller. So, Krishna is telling over here, "mama bhūta-maheśvaram". He
is the great controller of all of existence. So, this is the very important
verse. Which, if we look at the context, the previous verse was saying,
"mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ". It is under My "adhyakṣeṇa". So, "prakṛtiḥ" is
working. And see, Krishna can use the same thing over here. "mama
bhūta-maheśvaram". I am the "īśvaraḥ" of all of existence. Now, the words here
have specific and significant meanings. Let us look at them one by one. You
know. "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". So, let us look at "avajānanti". Hmm. Hmm. So,
"avajān". So, there are three phase of approaching this. So, "jānanti". "ajānanti".
And "avajānanti". So, when there is "jānanti". When we know Krishna properly,
then that knowledge of proper, you know, of Krishna, leads to liberation. This
was talked in the famous verse:

        janma karma ca me divyam
        evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
        tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma
        naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

They will come back to Me. That is supreme liberation. So, that is "jānanti".
So, knowledge will, leads to liberation. Then, the opposite of "jānanti" would
be "ajānanti". Those who do not know about Krishna. That is ignorance. Now, in
one sense, ignorance about Krishna is bad. But actually, it is, in many ways,
you know, you know, worse than ignorance can be wrong understanding.
Misunderstanding. So, you know, you know, to know, "jāna". "jānanti" is to
know. "ajānanti" is to not know. "avajānanti" is to know the opposite of what is
right. So, we see that when Srila Prabhupada was sharing Krishna Consciousness
in India. Most people thought we already know Krishna. And, you know, either
they had a, you know, a conception of Krishna as just some cultural, historical
figure. Maybe, He gave some message. But that is not very relevant to, in our
modern progressive times. Or there are impersonalists who say, yes, Krishna is
the sym..., you know, Krishna is the symbol of the Absol..., He is, of the
Absolute Truth. Krishna is, you know, we have to go beyond Krishna to the unborn
within Krishna. So, this was "avajānanti". So, "ajānanti". And "avajānanti". So
b..., so, when Srila Prabhupada went to the west. There, people were "ajānanti".
They knew nothing about Krishna. And we saw that, they took up Krishna
Consciousness much more easily. So, both are obstacles. Ignorance. And
misunderstanding. But often, misunderstanding can be a greater obstacle.
Especially, in terms of conceptual barriers that it creates. Because when there
is misunderstanding, I think, I already know. And first, I have to erase the
mental slate. And then, write fresh on it. Which requires more effort. So, of
course, you know, India, the advantage is, the conceptually, there is
misunderstanding. But culturally, there was agreement. You know. People, you
know, know about Krishna. People know about deity worship. People know about
Krishna's pastimes. And if they want to devote themselves to Krishna, it is
relatively easier for them. So, in the west, you know, conceptually, also, it
was difficult. But because they did no have any preconceptions. Misconceptions.
So, they accepted what Prabhupada taught. For them, culturally, it was
difficult. Because, you know, their culture was so radically, you know, tamasic
at that time. So, "avajānanti". Now, what happens when there is "avajānanti"?
You know. Misunderstanding. That that leads to continued material existence. And
then, there is increased bondage. So, because of the misunderstanding, we can
commit offenses. And those offenses can lead to suffering. So, what is this
verse saying? Prabhupada's purport is quite elaborate to this verse. "mānuṣīṁ
tanum āśritam". "mānuṣīṁ tanum". One who take shelter of the human body. You
know. That idea that actually the Absolute Truth has come in a mortal, material
human body. They, people do not understand. "paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto". So,
actually, here, Kri..., here, Krishna has used two words here. Krishna has used
the word "ajānanto". And "avajānanti". Both He has used. So, what is the
significance of that? He says that, actually, they misunderstand Me. "avajānanti
māṁ". And "ajānanto". "paraṁ bhāvam". And they do not know the transcendental
nature. What is that transcendental natu..., nature? That, actually, God can be
a person. You know. The Absolute Truth can have a form. And still be, you know,
unlimited. How is it possible? That is the inconceivable power of God. That He
can have a, He can have a form that fits on the lap of mother Yashoda. But when
He opens the mouth, within that, the whole universe is seen. So, it is "paraṁ
bhāvam ajānanto". They do not know My transcendental nature.

So, the problem of the impersonalists is that they extrapolate from their
limited material experience. And they think matter means miserab..., matter
means limitation. Matter means imperfection. Matter means, you know,
entanglement. And they extrapolate that that must apply to everything. Now, this
is true. You know. For everything material. But they equate material
with form. They think that the form causes entanglement. The form causes
bondage. The form is limited. Therefore, everything with form must be limited.
So, everything with matter is limited. That is true. But everything with form
does not have to necessarily be limited. Because spirit has the potential to be
unlimited. So, now, Prabhupada, hmm, you know, correlates immediately from the
"Brahma-saṁhitā" in the purport. This is that:

        īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

So, here, the word used is "maheśvaram". So, Prabhupada tw..., twice, He quotes
this. "īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ" is here. And again in the next line. "īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ". And then, again, third time, Prabhupada is quoting the same
verse. Here, "sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". "sac-cid-ānanda" was quoted here, also.
So, the emphasis is on, you know, you know, establishes that Krishna has a form.
And Prabhupada even quotes from the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad".

        Sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya kṛṣṇāya

So, Krishna has a form which is "sac-cid-ānanda". "rūpāya". It is a very
explicite word. Very little doubt about it. And then, again, this is 1.1. Right
in the beginning. The invocation of the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad" say this. And
then "Tam ekaṁ govindam". "Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraham". This was 1.35 in the
"Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". So, You are "Tam ekaṁ govindam". You are the one. You
know. There is no, there is no, no one like you. And you are having
"Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraham". You are having transcendental form. Now, the
"Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad", as we have discussed earlier briefly is, you know, you
know, you know, you know,  one of the, you know, Upanishads, in the 108
Upanishads. And it glo..., it glorifies Lord "Gopāla". And it establishes His
divinity. And His supremacy. Now, you know, beyond that, let us look at what
other pro..., other things Prabhupada says. Now, Prabhupada gives us a word
symbol over here. Which may seem a little disturbing for some people.

"They do not know that Kṛṣṇa’s body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss,
that He is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can award liberation
to anyone."

So, what do you mean by, how is Krishna's body a symbol? You know. We say
Krishna's body is the, the ultimate reality. So, what do we mean that He is
symbol of complete knowledge and bliss? So, basically, what it means is
"sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". Krishna's body is non-different, you know, fr..., from
Him. And "sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". So, He is, the sym..., the word symbol is
used in the sense that the impersonalists have a conception that knowledge and
bliss has to be impersonal. But, you know, you know, actually, knowledge and
bliss are, you know, manifested in a concentrated personal form. It is just
like, you know, we may have, on a cake, some cream coating. The cream, normally,
is, like a defused. Now, when the cr..., cream is defused. It is spread all over
the, you know, top of the cake. Now, we can take it out. And we can actually
make a, you know, you know, figure. You know. Maybe, we can make a mouse. We can
make a rabbit. We can make a dog. We can make an elephant. Some shell's bird
that is there. We can make a form which is just like that form, only. You know.
Of the child's forms. So, then, we can, we can make a child with the cream. Now,
actually, normally, cream is defused. But here, you know, when we talk about
the, you know, you know, toy that is made with a cream. All of it is cream, only.
So, like that, Krish..., the Absolute Truth is defused everywhere as the
Brahman. All-pervading Brahman. But that Absolute Truth is concentrated in the
form which is entirely "sac-cid-ānanda". So, in that sense, the Absolute Truth
is b..., manifested in a personal form. And, so, what the impersonalists think
of as, oh, the, as I, you know, bliss and knowledge has to be all-pervading. It
has to be diffused. Well, it can be diffused. It can be concentrated, also. So,
Krishna's body is just like a po..., po..., a toy made of crea..., with, it is
fully cream, only. So, like that, Krishna's body is fully transcendental. It is
fully "sac-cid-ānanda". So, that is the, you know, transcend..., so, Prabhupada,
this is Prabhupada's explaination of "paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto". And then,
Prabhupada quo..., quotes from the Bhagavatam now. Hmm. He quotes this verse.
From the, you know, inquiries of "Śaunaka" rsi:

        kṛtavān kila karmāṇi
        saha rāmeṇa keśavaḥ
        ati-martyāni bhagavān
        gūḍhaḥ kapaṭa-māṇuṣaḥ

So, "kṛtavān kila karmāṇi". "kila karmāṇi". Perform any amazing activities. And,
"saha rāmeṇa keśavaḥ". So, "rāma" refers here to Balarāma ji. And "keśavaḥ" is
Lord Krishna. So, w..., along with the Balarāma ji, "keśavaḥ" performed many
pastimes. And "ati-martyāni bhagavān". So, "bhagavān". This is the Supreme Lord.
He is all-attractive supreme person. "ati-martyāni". He is beyond, He is
actually situated beyond the situation o..., of the "martyāni". Of those who
have time for death. Or all living beings. But how did He perform His
activities? "gūḍhaḥ kapaṭa-māṇuṣaḥ". So, "gūḍhaḥ". You know. You know. It is
confidential. It is secret. "kapaṭa-māṇuṣaḥ". It appeared as if He was, you
know, He was actually concealing. He was deluding. He was b..., bewildering.
This is 1.1.20. And then, Prabhupada quotes, also, from the "Bhāgavatam":

        babhūva prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ

So, "babhūva" means became. "prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ". So, that Absolute Truth who had
manifested as V..., the four-handed Vishnu in the, you know, you know, prison
chamber of Devakī and Vasudeva. There, what did they do? That Absolute Truth,
"babhūva prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ", became "prākṛtaḥ śiśuḥ". Became a, you know, you know,
a child. As He seemed to be just like an ordinary tender child. And then, you
know, when, in the Eleventh Chapter, also, we will see that the, what does that,
this Abs..., this same Krishna who is the charioteer of Arjuna do? He will
become:

        tenaiva rūpeṇa catur-bhujena

He manifests the "chaturbhuja" form. We will discuss this in, when we come to
the, you know, you know, Eleventh Chapter. And here, also, then, He first, see,
manifested the "chaturbhuja rupa", manifested the "virata rupa". 
Manifested the "charat vitra ruja rupa". And then, after that, what happened?
"mānuṣaṁ rūpam". He manifested human-like form. So, now, what exactly is the
objection if you say Krishna Himself used the, you know, the word, actually, you
know, again assumed His original human-like form? So, "mānuṣaṁ rūpam". If the
word is used "mānuṣaṁ rūpam". You know. So, what is the problem? See, the
problem here is not the word "mānuṣaṁ". It is "mānuṣaṁ".

        avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā
        mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

So, "āśritam". So, the idea is that when we take shelter of something. That
something is different from us. So, if it is raining, I may find it rai..., take
shelter of the tree. You know. If I am poverty-stricken. I may take per...,
shelter of wealthy person. So, generally, that which gives shelter. And that
which takes shelter. The two are different. So, the idea here is that the
Absolute Truth is impersonal. And Absolute Truth has taken shelter of a material
form. Of a m..., m..., o..., of a human-like material form. That is the notion
of the impersonalists. But here, Krishna is telling, or, you know, the Bhagavad
Gita is telling that, actually, you know, this is the form which He eternally
has. He does not have to take shelter of this form. So, He is, so, the, all the
quotes that have been quoted, as, quoted to point out that this form is not
something which He has taken ashraya of. This form is eternally, you know, the
form that He has. "sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha". "kṛṣṇāya". "rūpāya".
"Sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya". This is what we quote, like, looked at from the
"Brahma-saṁhitā" and the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". And, you know, you know, now,
Prabhupada, you know, goes into a "Bhāgavatam" reference. Which seems to support
impersonalism. And He counters the "Māyāvādī" intepretation of that. This
3.29.21 from the Kapila section:

        Ahaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu bhūtātmāvasthitaḥ sadā

So, "Ahaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu". You know. I am situated in all living entities.
"sarveṣu bhūteṣu". "bhūteṣu". "bhūtātmāvasthitaḥ sadā". I am situated in all
living beings. When he says this, you know, so, Prabhupada says that, we look at
the explanation of this even by Chakravarti Padi. And Jiva Goswami. And he gives
explanations that, actually, you know, the Lord is present as the living entity.
You know. The Lord is present with the living entity as the Supersoul. And the
se..., term Supersoul, is internally present, manifest externally as the
"arcā-vigra". And, you know, you know, the point is, you know, what is the
context of this verse? When it is said that, actually, the Lord is situated in
all, all, the heart of all living beings? You know. One should respect all
people, also. One should not think that, oh, I just worship the te..., deity in
the temple. That is the kanistha platform. I will not care for devotees. You
know. I had to. I, We said, definitely have to worship the deity in the temple.
But along with that, I also need to respect the devotees. And because, not just
the devotees, all living beings. Because the Lord is present in the heart of all
living beings. The context of this verse is not to say that, the Absolute Truth
is impersonal. Diffused in the heart of all living beings. No. There is a
person. And when that person's presence becomes accessible to us as the deity.
But that does not mean that we stay unconscious to that person's presence
everywhere else. The Supreme Person is present in, also, the heart of all living
beings. And that Absolute Truth should also be worshipped over there. You know.
You know. You know. So, Prabhupada, "avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā". He takes it in two
ways here. One is that, they deride the personal form of the Lord. And second is
that they deride the, you know, the form of the deity. Which is also an object
of worship. Now, Krishna next will describe, those who do this "avajā...",
kind of "avajānanti". Those who deride Him, what happens to them. That He
describes in the next verse.

        moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo
        mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ
        rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva
        prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ

So, "moghāśā". So, here, Krishna, the word "yog...", "moghā". "moghā" means
waste. Krishna has used the word "moghā" earlier in 3.16 in the Bhagavad Gita
where He has said.

        aghāyur indriyārāmo
        moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

He says those who do not participate in cycle "yajña", they live sinfully.
18:45
