Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6smqKwWenm8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=6smqKwWenm8&event=video_description&redir_token=ksbV2Ywd5XyeLPQJwRmD8seTe6N8MTU0ODQ4OTI0MkAxNTQ4NDAyODQy&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_110_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_05_to_17_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Eleventh Chapter. Just about to start off in rev..., viewing through the
Gita's description what is one of the most extraordinary mystical, religious
visions in all of religious histories. You know. In different religious
traditions, there are saints. And seers. Who get visions. So, Mu..., Muhammad is
supposed to have got a vision which took him to, in which he saw, met all the
previous prophets. Jesus. And Abraham. Moses. And Abraham. And he is supposed to
have seen the face of Allah, also. And then, but what actually he saw, when he
saw God is not described in the Quran. Jesus is said to have been the son of
God. And he has been in touch with God. But what he inv..., what were the nature
of those interactions, that is not spoken about much. So, the, you know,
manifestation of God, that is described in this chapter in the Bhagavad Gita has
few parallels. Few, if any parallels in the religious literature of the world.
So, there have been many great saints throughout history who have had
experiences of God. No doubt. But here, the experience is not just an inner
experience. It is an outer vision. And that vision is not just some imagination.
It is a revelation. So, Arjuna is seeing not because of some imagination from
his mind. But it is a revelation that is given by God Himself. So, God is
revealing how He is the universal form. You know. So, what exactly does the
universal form mean? And, you know, how does it, you know, relate with our
normal understanding of various things? We will see this in due course. Let us
look at Arjuna's verses. You know. Let, let us look at the Gita's verses how
they describe this mysterious phenomena. You know. You know. You know. You know.
So, let us look at it from the Bhagavad Gita. Verses 5 onwards. So, here, we
discussed what is happening in this chapter. Let us have a quick overview of
the chapter once again. You know. Verses 1 to 4 was Arjuna's request. Verses 5
to 8 was Krishna's descrip..., is Krishna's description of the universal form.
Then, 9 to 14 is "Sañjaya"'s description of the universal form. Then, after
that, 15 to 31 is Arjuna's description. And then, it moves forward. So, let us
look, start, let us start by looking at Krishna's description of the universal
form. So, we will look at the description. And as we move forward, we will try
to understand the concepts. That are implied by that description.

        sri-bhagavan uvaca

        pasya me partha rupani
        sataso ’tha sahasrasah
        nana-vidhani divyani
        nana-varnakrtini ca

So, "pasya me". You know. See my "rupani". Now, you know, you know, Arjuna had
asked to see the "rūpam aiśvaraṁ". The mysterious form. "rūpam aiśvaraṁ". The
opulence of the form. So, "pārtha rūpāṇi". So, "rūpāṇi" means, here, Arjuna is
being told that there is not just one form. There are many forms in it. You
know. So, actually, is one majestic form, which, which in cohesion. Or in, you
know, you know, synthesis can be called as the universal form. But within that
universal form, there are many, many forms. So, "pasya". So, actually, you know,
this word "pasya" will come several times in this chapter. And, you know,
especially in Krishna's description over here in the next four verses. And the
point is that, Arjuna had desired to see. And Krishna is, see now. Krishna is
saying see. See. So, this is a, as I said, not just an, you know, experience or
a, you know, inner realisation. It is a vi..., visible vision for Arjuna.
"sataso ’tha sahasrasah". "sataso". So, now, actually, how many forms are there?
"sata" is hundreds. "sahasrasah" is thousands. So, in, in that one form, there
are hundreds and thousands of forms. "nana-vidhani divyani". "nana-vidhani".
That there are many different kinds of forms, also. Variegated. And they are
all divine. They are all tri..., they are all extraordinary. They are connected
with God. And "nana-varnakrtini ca". So, "varna" is color. "akrtini" is shape.
So, they are, that means, there is one universal form. But within that, there is
tremendous variety. First of all, there are many forms. Now, all of them, forms
are "div...", "divyā". But then, they are of different colors. They are all
different, you know, shapes. And they are all variegated. So, you know, this is
the mysterious vision that Krishna is revealing to Arjuna. So, normally, when we
see, you know, we do not just see with the eyes. We see with our intelligence.
This is not just a philosophical point. It is also a practical reality. You
know. When we see, we cannot make sense of things unless our intelligence has
some f..., past framework. By which we can make sense of things. You know. There
are two, there are two kinds of blindness. There is congenital blindness. And
there is adventitious blindness. So, congenital is when a person is blind right
from the, you know, birth itself. Adventitious is when that person becomes blind
over a period of time after having had vision for some time. Now, in some cases,
if the cause of the blindness is correctable, then the person who is blind may
be able to get back eyes through surgery. And through other medical treatment.
Now, if the, if the person had been congentally..., congenitally blind. And got
back eyes. Say, the person has been blind for 15 years. 20 years. And then, for
the first time, the surgery is done. And the person gets back eyes. You know.
After that person gets back eyes, there have been, you know, jour..., medical
journal articles. And even books written about this. That these people who are
blind and they got back the eyes back. You know. You know. All that they, when
they opened their eyes, all that they could see, sense was just a confused haze
of light and colors which was also incoherent for them. So, one of those
persons, he describes, when he asks, you know, I just opened my eyes. And I
could just see a bewildering maze of colors. And suddenly, I heard a voice. And
then, I looked in that diretion. And then, I saw a pattern of dark and faint
colors. And, you know, because I knew that voices came from faces. So, I
realised that whatever I was seeing was a face. But I just could not make sense
of it.

So, whether there was a, there was a carpenter, you know, who had used tools.
And all of, and for many, many years, this carpenter had been using tools to cut
wood. Although, he was blind. You know. So, when the first time, he saw a, you
know, you know, saw. You know. A machine for cut..., a, a tool for cutting. You
know. He looked at it. And he looked at it as if he had never seen it, only.
He just could not make sense of it. Although, he had been using it, so, a, for
a, throughout his life for earning a lifehood. But still, it was completely
unfamiliar. And then, as he was looking at it without being able to make any
sense. Then, as soon as movements were unsure. And, and, you know, un...,
unsteady. But then, as soon as he touched, then, immediately, oh, this is the
part. This is the blade part. This is the handle part. He started picking up.
And using it. So, he was able to use it far better with the sense of touch than
with the sense of sight. Why is that? Because, you know, our knowledge proceeds
from the familiar to the unfamiliar. We have something familiar that we know.
And then, something more which connects with the familiar. And that is how our
knowledge proceeds further. But when, you know, there is no framework for our
knowledge. When there is no, you know, you know, nothing familiar whi...,
through which the unfamiliar can launch on, then there is no, you know,
intelligibility in the perception. So, people who are, you know, you know,
congenitally blind. If somehow, they get eyes, they need, you know, a long
period of inculturation. You know. For them to get accustomed. And habituated to
having eyes. And to function with the eyes. It is not easy for them. Why?
Because they just have no prior frame of reference with which to view the world.
So, actually, people see not just with their eyes. They see with their
intelligence. So, the color patterns and the shapes, and everything that we see
with our eyes, if we did not have a prior bank of experience with which through
to connect with view, we would not be able to understand it. So, similarly here,
you know, Arjuna is going to get a vision for which he has no prior connection
to make. Nobody has seen anything like this. And Krishna will also tell, you
know, you know, several times in this chapter, "adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". This has never
been seen before. "adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". So, "dṛṣṭa" is to see. "adṛṣṭa" is not to
see. Not seen. "pūrvāṇi" is in the past. This has never been seen before. So,
therefore, Krishna by these introductory verses is giving Arjuna some basic
framework by which he can, he will be able to, by which Arjuna will be able to
make some sense of what he is going to see now. So, therefore, Krishna is
telling Arjuna. He is orienting Himself. Like when a person gets into a company,
there is an orientation course. So, that person knows what is that. This is the,
this department of the company. This is the, you know, these are the, these are
in charge. This is here. This is here. So, now, Arjuna needs an orientation
course before he can have a perception session. If, with the universal form. So
that orientation course is these four verses. Where Krishna is giving Arjuna a
pre..., a predescription of the view that is going to follow. And then, when he
describes this, he says, now, Prabhupada explains in the purport that actually,
Krishna is not interested, Arjuna is not interested in seeing the form for
himself. Then, what is the reason that Arjuna wants to, he asked Arjuna, Krishna
to show the form? He is saying, just like the previous chapter, when Arjuna
asked the question. So, in 10.16 to 10.19..., you know, 18. The reason for
asking the question was, you know, for "loka-saṅgraham". You know. People cannot
see the spiritual reality. S..., they can see ma..., matter. So, from matter,
how to guide them to spirit. That was the purpose.

Similarly, here, in this chapter, also, you know, how will people know that
someone is God? So, one aspect is to recognise that, you know, that person has
extraordinary power, has the capacity to do extraordinary things. And one of the
things that that person is capable of doing is displaying the uni..., universal
form. So, here, Arjuna is, you know, requesting Krishna that You please display
the universal form. So that, you know, what, so that people who are naysayers.
People who are doubters. You know. Who, you know, so there can be two categories
of people. People who are very gullible. And who believe, you know, believe
anyone and everyone who claims to be God. And there are naysayers, or who even
do not believe that the real God is God. So, actually, there are two kinds of
illusions. So, to think of God to be ordinary person. And to think of an
ordinary person to be God. So, this is, the 19th Chap..., in the 18th Chapter,
we will see, now, characteristic of knowledge and ignorance is:

        sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca

That "sarvārthān". What is the reality? Exactly opposite one pursues of that.
You know. You know. You know. So, that sort of, you know, misfortune of, you
know, perceiving the opposite of the reality, that is, you know, to be avoided.
And Krishna wants to protect, Arjuna wants to protect people from that. So,
Krishna has told so much about His opulences. And some naysayers may think this
is just Krishna bragging about Himself. But no. Krishna, Arjuna wants Krishna
to demonstrate. You know. So that, you know, people will know that f..., Krishna
is not just speaking words. Krishna has the, you know, or the words that
spea..., Kri..., peo..., Krishna is speaking are real. And Krishna can
demonstrate them. And even set the precedent that if anybody wants to claim to
be God, that person has to be able to show the universal form. So, Kri..., you
know, Kri..., Arju..., Arjuna, Arjuna's request is primarily for the sake of
people in general. So that the people in general, you know, will have a standard
by which to know who is really God. Who is not God. So, let us see now what
happens. You know. So, as the verse moves forward. You know. So:

        paśyādityān vasūn rudrān
        aśvinau marutas tathā
        bahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi
        paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata

So, "paśya". You know. So, now, a whole who is who in universal, in Vedic
cosmology is being revealed in this universal form. "paśyādityān vasūn rudrān".
You know. So, many of these people if you see, they were mentioned in the, you
know, Vibhutis. So, these are already powerful personalities. So, "ādityā".
"ana mahanam". Vishnu. Sankarah. "ru...". "rudrās cāsmi". "rudrā". "Sankanam...".
"rudrā". "sankaram...". "rudrā". "rudrāṇāṁ". "cāsmi". It is like that. You know.
"vasūnāṁ". "cāsmi". "vasūnāṁ". So, like that. You know. You know. You know. So,
like that, basically, what was described was, these are all illustrious persons.
And among them, the person who is most illustrious, that is Krishna. That person
is manifesting Krishna's glories. So, "paśyādityān vasūn rudrān". So, see the
"ādityā"s. See the "vasū", see the "rudrā"s. And "aśvinau marutas tathā". So,
see the "aśvinau". "aśvinau". See the "marutas". So:

        marīcir marutām asmi

was also described in the previous chapter. "bahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". "bahūny".
Like that. All the ama..., all the powerful personalities in the university are
there. "adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi". You know. What no one else has seen until now.
"paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata". "paśya". "āścaryāṇi". It is actually amazing what is
being seen. "bhārata". "bhārata". So, what is being seen is amazing.
"paśyāścaryāṇi". You know. So, actually, for the more, the, this is the
"āścaryā". It was the second time, the word "paśya" has come. And along with
that, the "āścaryā" is described. So, now, it may seem that Krishna, is Krishna
sort of praising Himself here? He says, what I am going to show you is amazing.
No. It is not Krishna praising Himself. Krishna is just stating objective
reality. You know. All these celestial personalities are not very easy to
behold. You know. Even alone, they are not really, very easily visible to a
human beings. Then, what to speak of all of them together in one form? That is
a revelation by the Absolute Truth. That is even more extraordinary. So,
"paśya". "āścaryāṇi". Second time, the word "paśya" has come. Now, again, third
time, the word "paśya" will come.

        ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ
        paśyādya sa-carācaram
        mama dehe guḍākeśa
        yac cānyad draṣṭum icchasi

So, "ihaika-sthaṁ". "iha". "eka-stham". Here, at one place. "jagat kṛtsnaṁ". The
whole universe is. See.

        ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ
        paśyādya sa-carācaram

"paśyādya sa-carācaram". Now, "carā". So, "carā" and "acaram". So, the moving and
the non-moving. At one place everything in the universe can be seen. "kṛtsnaṁ".
"kṛtsnaṁ" is everything as we discussed earlier. "mama dehe guḍākeśa". So,
"guḍākeśa". Oh, Arjuna, see all this in "mama dehe". In My body. You know. So,
Krishna is te..., clearly telling what is this vision that you are seeing? It is
My body. So, until now, the specific word, Vishvarupa has not come. That will
come later on when Arjuna speaks his description and glorification of the vision
that he is having. But this is also one of the close references. Where the Lord
is us, telling us is "mama dehe". This is My form. Which kind of form? Now, when
Krishna is saying, this is My form, what does it mean? It is actually referring
to the form of the Supreme Lord. You know. Which is manifested as the "Virata
rupa". "yac cānyad draṣṭum icchasi". "yac cānyad". And beyond this, whatever
else, you may want to see, that also, you can see over here. So, what does it
mean whatever else you may want to see? "yac cānyad". Actually, it refers to,
you know, the future outcome of the battle. You know. Arjuna is, you know, about
to reach a fierce war. And because he is going to reach a war, he will naturally
be eager to know what is going to be the faith? Who is going to win? Who is
going to lose? So, although, that is not specifically what Arjuna has asked. But
Krishna says, I will show you that, also. In this way, you know, Krishna is
giving Arjuna a, a temporary provisional glimpse of omniscience. How, now,
omniscience means to know everything. So, glimpse of omniscience means that He
is saying, at one place, you will be able to see everything. See, normally, when
we are at one place, we can see only what is visible in that place. Like if I am
in a particular room, I can see what is in that room. Now, you know, through
some, you know, you know, high-tech gadgets, through internet, we can be in one
place. And we can know a lot about various places. Ok. This is happening there.
That is happening there. That is happening there. But it is all secondary. It
is, you know, so, it is all dependent on intermediate sources which we may be
people who are reporting. Or which may be cameras which are showing. Whichever
way it is, we need intermediaries, you know, to be able to perceive. But God
does not. Because God is Himself all-pervading. And in, He has vision and
knowledge of everything. So, here, Krishna where, in the revelation of the
"Virata rupa" is giving a provisional kind of omniscience. You know. So, in the
"Virata rupa", not exactly all the nitty-gritty details of the universe. But the
who is who of the universe, all the prominent people of the universe. And
actually, Krishna says that, in this "Virata rupa", what will you see?
"sa-carācaram". Even all living beings are present. So, "ihaika-sthaṁ jagat
kṛtsnaṁ". So, although, you are in one place, you can see "kṛtsnaṁ". Whole
universe. And, you know, what you are seeing is My form. This is the
extraordinary, you know, me..., mercy that the Lord is giving to him. Now, here,
it is described next verse. Krishna tells Arjuna. Now, Arjuna is waiting.
Krishna is describing to Arjuna that see this form. But Arjuna is not able to
see anything. Then, Krishna says, actually, you cannot see now. With this. So,
what you will, you will need, you will need special eyes for this. So, then,
here, Krishna here will say, I will give those eyes.

        na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum
        anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā
        divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ
        paśya me yogam aiśvaram

So, "na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum". It is not possible for you to see, oh, Arjuna.
You know. You know. It is not possible. So, you know, actually, 11.4 was
"manyase yadi tac chakyaṁ". If it is possible for me to see. "manyase yadi tac
chakyaṁ". And He says, actually, "na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum". So, "mayā draṣṭum
iti prabho". Same word. "mayā draṣṭum". Will it be possible for me to see me?
Then, reveal it to me. So, Krishna tells, no, it is not possible for you to see
you, for you to see Me. But still, I will give you the pow..., p..., power.

        na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum
        anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā

With you, with "anena". With those, such an eyes that you have, you cannot see.
Therefore, what I will give you. "divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ". That I will give you
divine eyes. "divyaṁ dadāmi". I will give you divine eyes. And what will, what
is this? You know. When He gives the eyes, He is telling now. "paśya me yogam
aiśvaram". Just see my mystic opulence. Now, this is 11.8 where Krishna is using
"paśya me yogam aiśvaram". Where has He used it earlier? 9..., 9.5:

        na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni
        paśya me yogam aiśvaram
        bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho
        mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

So, in 9.5B, He has used the word "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". Behold my mystical
opulence. So, we have said that over there. "paśya me". See my mystical
opulence. So, what is actually happening? There, it was more of, their "paśya"
was not so much in literal seeing. "paśya" was in terms of understanding. You
now. Sometimes, when somebody makes a point, then, we say, "I see". Now, when I
say, "I see". What actually I mean is I understand. So, or sometimes, people
say, do you see what I am saying? You know. That means, not literaly see. That
is in terms of understanding. So, do you understand what I am saying? So, the
word "see" is also sometimes used for understanding. So, there, in 9.5B, "paśya
me yogam aiśvaram". Just see my mystical opulence. So, there, Krishna has not
given any vision to Arjuna. Krishna has given a description of how I sustain all
living beings. And still, I do not sustain all living beings. I am different
from them. That is mystical opulence. So, it was in terms of, you know, you
know, you know, a rhetorical expla..., expression to, you know, to underscore,
you know, you know, a mysterious descr..., to highlight a mysterious
description. So, a mysterious description was, ok, this was, you know, this was,
I sustain all. But I do not sustain all. How is this possible? This is my
inconceivable potency. This is my mystical potency. But here, "paśya me yogam
ai...", "aiśvaram" is not a, a rhetorical description. It is a b..., you know,
you know, you know, literal instruction. Just see now. It is a, so, now, in this
verse, "divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ". So, Krish..., Arjuna is being given eyes by
Krishna. You know. When we say "given eyes", you know, it is not like an organ
donation that is done today. It is not as a person has to go into
unconsciousness. And you have to take out the eyes. And then, somebody else has
to be donor for the eyes. And that person gives the eyes. This, so, that, we
can, so, people say, give eyes like that. That is not the kind of eyes that
Arjun..., Krishna is giving. Actually, Krishna gives the power to see. Power to
see. So, you know, Krishna is the Supreme Lord. And we have discussed this
earlier, also, that, you know, how the universe is like a computer. You know. It
is like a, if you have a mainframe computer with huge amount of information.
Information in it. And then, within that, actually, there are different users
who have different levels of access. So, some users have access only to
preliminary ta..., profiles. Some users have access to even the code files. And
some users have f..., access to everything. So, like that, there are different
levels of access. So, like that, within the universe, also, the universe is like
a, built with multiple levels of access. And we, human beings, have a particular
level of access within it. That devatas have higher level of access. And Krishna
has complete access. So, now, sometimes, when a computer, when a person is
working on a computer. You know. There may be a user who is like a child.
Another user is like a parent. The parent says, now, I will give you access. And
then, suddenly, all the files that were blocked, they were not able to see on
the computer. Now, suddenly, they can see, oh, all these files are already
there. So, like that, "paśya me yogam aiśvaram". So, what is Krishna giving?
When Krishna is giving eyes, that means, it is not that some eyes are being sent
through the fingers of Krishna. And they are planting themselves on the eye,
over about, over the eyes of Kri..., Arjuna. No. Krishna is giving access.
Krishna is giving access to the higher realities that are there. And He is
giving, not just the access, the ability to access, also. So:

        divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ

I am giving you divine vision by which you can see. You know. When He describes
this, at this point, what happens? You know. When He says this, so, Visvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura describes something interesting over here. He says that, the
"Virata rupa" is itself not spiritual. It is also material. Because it is about
the universe. Now, where the universe itself is material. And so, therefore,
even the "Virata rupa" is material. It is not a, it is not a spiritual form.
Now, by one definition, we could say that, anything connected with, you know,
Krishna, with the supreme spiritual reality is spiritual. That is fine. You
know. You know. That is from an applicational perspective. But from a
compositional or constitutional perspective, you know, there are certain things
which are made of, you know, earth, water, fire, ether. And certain things which
are made up of, you know, sat-cit-ananda. So, the, you know, you know, you know,
that difference of matter and spirit always remains true. Because it remain
true. So, it has to be understood, you know, you know, things have to be
understood from that perspective. So, Arjuna and the people over around him,
they are in human bodies. And they have the normal vision. Then, there is the
pure devotional vision. Wherein one sees Krishna. And one understands that
Krishna is God. Who has concealed His divinity out of love. He has concealed His
supreme power. And supreme nature. He has become a charioteer for His devotee.
Because He wants to rel..., so, reciprocate and relish love. So, that is the
divine intimate vision that Arjuna has. The other people over there,
"nara-dārakeṇa". "eva". So, "māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa". So, actually, those
who are in maya, they think that He is just like another ordinary human being.
So, that is normal human vision that people may have. So, Arjuna does not have
the normal human vision. He has a, you know, pure devotional vision. So, now,
for Arjuna, when there is, Krishna is saying "divyaṁ dadāmi". Actually, that is
not, that is a downgading of vision. Now upgrading of vision. Why? Because He is
at a spiritual level. Where he is seeing the Shyamasundara form. The partha
sarathi form of Krishna. Very intimate form. And he is reciprocating with that
form. You know. So, for him to see the "Virata rupa" is not actually an
upgradatio..., it is not upgrading. It is downgrading. And Prabhupada points to
this point in a, you know, in a very extraordinary section in the "Bhā...".
"Bhāgavatam". He says, you know, you know, so, here, such a bold statement
Prabhupada makes.

"Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship with Kṛṣṇa
are attracted by loving features, not by a godless display of opulences."

Now, just think about this, you know, you know, God is displaying His opulences.
And Prabhupada is calling it as a godless display of opulences. Now, how can
God's display of opulences be called as a godless display of opulence? So,
actually, this is the vision of a, you know, this is the vision of a devotee. A
devotee is not just d..., inter..., is not interested in just a brute display of
power. I am so great. And actually, even God is not interested in that. You
know. Krishna that in the spiritual world is not interested in everybody
knowing, oh, I am God. Now, all of you, bow down to Me. And the eternal ritual
that you are doing in the spiritual is, everybody keep coming in a sequence.
And keep bowing down to Me. Keep bowing down to Me. And that is what you, all of
you will have to do for an eternity. Krishna is not, not a God like that.
Kri..., That is not what Krishna is interested in. Krishna is interested in
reciprocating love with His devotees. And for the sake of reciprocating love, He
is actually, you know, con..., He conceals His divinity. But in some cases, for
people to know the truth. By which, they can, you know, can come out of
illusion. And come to reality. They can give up, you know, rebellion against
Him. They can give up forgetfulness of Him. And return back to connection with
Him. Reunion with Him. So, for that sake, Krishna sometimes asserts and displays
His divinity. So, a devotee who already accepts Krishna supremacy, especially
the "Virata rupa", you know, it is very difficult to love the "Virata rupa". We
will see that Arjuna's responses vary. First, he is amazed. Then, he is
awestruck. Then, he is fearful. And then, he is overwhelmed with fear. And then,
he just begs, who are You?

        ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

Who are You? Please help me. Please tell me who You are. So, Arjuna goes throuh
a whole gamut of emotions over there. In his response to the darshan of the
"Virata rupa". But, you know, the point is that, the "Virata rupa" is not very
easy to love. You know. You cannot have, the "Virata rupa", you cannot do rasa
dance with "Virata rupa". No. It is everywhere. How will you dance? Or, you
know, mother Yashoda cannot feed, feed any food to, mother, to the "Virata
rupa". So, the "Virata rupa" displays the, displays the opulences of God in
terms of power and pervasion. Pervasion means that He pervades everything,
exists everywhere. But actually, it is not very conducive for intimate devotion.
And now, that is what the devotee hungers for. The devotee wants loving
reciprocation. Intimate devotion for the Lord. And this form is not very anikula
for that. You know. That is why Prabhupada is calling it as a godless display of
opulence. A devotee is not very much interested in that. Now, you know, a
Krishna is being requested by Arjuna, because Arjuna wants to, you know, you
know, set a standard for others. And, you know, Arj..., Krishna will oblige with
this res..., request. You know, But, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
know, Prabhupada quotes this well-known verse from the "Bhāgavatam", 10.12.11
about how different people perceive, you know, God differently:

        itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā
        dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena
        māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa
        sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ

"caru". So, "itthaṁ satāṁ". Here i..., here is "satāṁ". "satāṁ" is the truth.
"brahma-sukhānubhūtyā". Here is the, you know, here is that same, you know,
being. Who is considered as the "brahma-sukhā". 32:14
