Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMJUSi0LoiU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_105_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_08_to_11_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=OMJUSi0LoiU&event=video_description&redir_token=w677UApDtXEQLfNvgR0CsbF5tO98MTU0ODQ4ODkzMkAxNTQ4NDAyNTMy

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now going to start the four essential verses of the Gita. The Chatur Shloki
Bhagavad Gita. 10.8 to 11. Rāmānujāchārya, you know, you know, has referred to
this as the, the four nutshell verses of the Gita. And that nomenclature has
been adopted by subsequent teachers, also. Of the Bhagavad Gita. And we will see
why these verses are so significant in terms of their content. And in terms of
their context. So, in terms of their context, you know, in a sense, these are
the last verses that Krishna speaks in His instructions. And then, after this,
Krishna gives a con..., Arjuna gives a conclu..., you know, you know,
almo..., an understanding that is almost conclusive. So, till now, whenever
Arjuna has spoken, First Chapter, Arjuna spoke. At that time, He was speaking
that I do not wan..., the reasons why he does not want to fight. After that,
whenever Arjuna has spoken. Arjuna has spoken to ask questions. And, you know,
you know, this is practically the only time in the Bhagavad Gita, where, you
know, Arjuna, you know, paraphrases and rephrases his understanding of, you
know, Krishna's message. This is the place where, after the Chatur Sholoki
Bhagavad Gita comes the, you know, explanation o..., by Arjuna of the position
of Krishna. And this sort of exp..., you know, explanation does not come even at
the end of the Bhagavad Gita. At the end of the Bhagavad Gita, you know, the
Gita has been taken. The Gita has taken Krishna and Arjuna far away from the
battlefield to the discussion of, you know, profound philosophical topics. That
the height of which has rarely been scaled either before or after. But by the
18th Chapter, from those phenomenal heights, Krishna and Arjuna are coming down.
And there, Arjuna says:

        kariṣye vacanaṁ tava

I will fight. I will fight. Because now, the action has been called for on the
battlefield. But here, after the Chatur Shloki Bhagavad Gita, Krishna, His, you
know, message is rephrased by Arjuna. And there, we will see, he unambiguously
declares Krishna to be the Supreme Person. The hear..., ultimate Ab..., you
know, ultimate reality. The hear..., Absolute Truth. The acme. The pinnacle of
existence. So, that is the message of the Bhagavad Gita. And that comes
immediately after these verses. So, prior to this, also, Ninth Chapter, Krishna
has called as the most confidential knowledge. This chapter, also, Krishna has
said "paramaṁ vacaḥ". This chapter. He says that I am going to give the supreme
instructions. And till now, He has been building up by saying in 10.3 that this
knowledge will free you from sinful reactions. And 10.7, He has said that this
knowledge will give you, you know, you know, will grant, will make you
wholeheartedly devoted to me. Discussed in last, yesterday's verse.

        so ’vikalpena yogena
        yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ

Without any doubt. Without any delusion. You will become wholeheartedly fixed in
Me. So, then, Krishna will describe this in the forth verses. So, if we look at
the context. What is happening? You know. After that, Arjuna gives, the only
place in the Bhagavad Gita where he explains his understanding. Now, of course,
when there is Virata rupa, in the Eleventh Chapter, Arjuna does offer
prayers. And, he, and describe what he is, you know, you know, see beholding.
But, you know, that is not exactly a paraphrase of what Krishna has spoken. So,
here, Krishna is, Arjuna is giving understanding on, so, Arjuna is giving the
understanding here only, the only place of the Gita. And before d..., it,
Krishna is building up by saying this is "paramaṁ vacaḥ". The most confidential
knowledge that I will be speaking. So, therefore, you know, th..., from the
context, it is very significant. Now, let us look at the content. So, when we
look at the content, let us look at the, you know, you know, summary and
overview of what the four verses are saying. Then, we will go into the four
verses. So, in one sense, among these, you know, four verses, also, 10.8 to 11.
8 gives a summary. And 9, 10, 11 are elaborating that. So, 8 says, those who
know that I am the source of everything become enlightened. They become buddha.
And they become devoted to Me wholeheartedly. That is "bhava samanvitah". So,
you know, now, this that they become devoted. And they become enlightened. That
is talked about in 8. Now, 9 is, describes how they become devoted to Me. That
is, you know, "mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā". You know. That is described in 9th
verse. And then, 10th and 11th verses describes how they become buddha. So, you
know, you know, so, Krishna, He says that, you know, A..., Krishna gives buddhi
yoga. That is described in the "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ" verse. Famous verse in
10.10. And then, how Krishna gives buddhi is described in the 11th verse. That,
you know, I am present in the heart. And I remove, with the torchlight of
knowledge, the darkness. So, in a sense, this is what the verses are talking
about. How a devotee become, how a soul, one understanding Krishna's positions
becomes devoted. And becomes enlightened. So, this talks about the redirection
of the heart. And the redirection of the head. So, the redirection of the heart.
The, the enlightenment is described in the, the, the understanding of Krishna's
position described in the 8th verse. And the resulting redirection of the heart
is described in 9th verse. And then, the 10th and 11th verse, the, you know,
direction of the, the illumination, the understanding that comes up. That is
also described. So, now, let us look at this from another way, perspective. The
8th. We know that there are these categories in, you know, you know, you know,
understanding God. Or for that matter, any subject. Sambandha. Abhidheya. And
prayojana. So, what is this Sambandha? Abhidheya? And prayojana? Actually,
"sambandha", you know, the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta" says, "sambandha", krishna.
"abhidheya", "bhakti". "premā", "prayojana". So, these are three aspects.
"sambandha". What is it that we want to develop a relationship with? So, by
philosophical, you know, contemplation, we understand, I want to develop a
relationship with the ultimate reality. And the ultimate reality is personal, is
Krishna. So, therefore, that is the first step. "sambandha". Then, how do I
develop the relationship? There is a process of "sādhana-bhakti". That is
bhakti. So, that is the process which I follow. And after that, what happens
when I develop that? Then, the result is "prayojana". That is "prema". So, for
example, to understand this "sambandha". "abhidheya". "prayojana". Let us, we
may consider a simple example. Sometimes, there are, you know, t...,
advertisers. Which say, say, you know, person, as a car is shown. And if that
person is showing, driving the car. And says, enjoy this ca..., purchase the
car. And enjoy the envy in your neighbors' eyes. Now, actually, when the
advertisements indicate the level of people's consciousness. You know. Is
env..., envy something to be enjoyed? Enjoy the envy in your neighbors' eyes.
So, that is a standard of enjoyment that people have. There is no positive
enjoyment. The enjoyment is in pushing people down. But anyway. So, when that
person sees an ad like this, that person sees, oh, I want that car. So, what
happens? The "sambandha" is with the car. Oh, I want to develop a relationship
with the car. What is the relationship? I want to be the owner of the car.
Possessor of the car. So, then, "abhidheya". What is the "abhidheya"? Oh, I have
to earn that much money. If I do not have the money, I have to take a car loan.
So, procuring the money is the "abhidheya". And then, what is the "prayojana"?
The "prayojana" is I come in the car. And I am proudly riding the car. And I am
waiting to see the envy in my neighbors' eyes. And then, I look at. Even I find
that, he has got a new better car than me. And instead of the envy coming in his
eyes, the envy comes in my eyes. So, what happens is, in material life, just
when we expect the "prayojana" to come. When we expect the fruit, the happiness
to come, at that time, it just does not come. It just does not come. You know.
Or it comes. It is so little. And it goes away after that. You know. You know.
But the overall point is that this is how in any activity, we develop. We may
want to develop a relationship. We decide. This is the object. Or this is the
person with who, with whom I want to develop the relationship. Then, there is
a process. And then, after the process comes the result.

So, you know, here, "sambandha". "abhidheya". "prayojana". So, "sambandha" is
Krishna. Now, "sambandha" is, Krishna means, we understand that I have to
develop a relationship with Krishna. So, the first verse talks about
"sambandha". "abhidheya". And "prayojana". All three. And then, second verse
talks about "abhi...". It is the, 10.9 talks about "abhidheya" as well as
"prayojana". And the 10th, 11th talks all the more about "abhidheya". That
means, it talks about, you know, you know, you know, you know, the process by
which the connection is developed. So, let us see how that happens in this
verse. Verses one by one. But suffice it, at this stage, we understand the
significance of the verse. The whole philosophy is, you know, compressed
together in a cond..., in a concised way in these four verses. So, let us look
at, you know, you know, 10.8 now.

        ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
        mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate
        iti matvā bhajante māṁ
        budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

So, "ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo". I am the source of everything. "mattaḥ sarvaṁ
pravartate". Everything emanates from Me. So, actually, we may say, this
seem..., this may seem to be just repetitious. You know. Everything comes from,
I am the source of everything. And everything comes from Me. So, what is the
point of repeating the same thing again? I am the source of everything. "ahaṁ
sarvasya prabhavo". Is, doesn't that mean the same thing as "mattaḥ sarvaṁ
pravartate"? Actually, the word "pravartate" is, you know, also used in a
present tense. In the sense of maintenance. That means, Krishna is saying I am
not only the source of everything. But actually, I am also the maintainer of
everything. Everything is being sustained by Me. So, everything is being
arranged. And its, you know, whole maintenance is going on by My arrangement.
So, everything is, in that sense, ema..., acting within Me. So, earlier, we have
discussed the conception of God as, you know, deistic which some people have.
You know. There is theism. There is deism. And there is atheism. Atheism is God
does not exist, only. God is neither the creator, nor the controller. So, theism
is the idea that God is the creator and the controller. But deism is the idea
that God is the creator. But not the controller. God is the creator. But not the
controller. Say, just like a clock is there. A clock is made by some maker. But
is not the, maker is not controlling the clock right now. So, that is the idea
of God that some people have. So, that is not the idea of God that the Bhagavad
Gita very directly substantiates. Krishna, it says that, actually, God is not
just a distinct, you know, deistic sort of designer. God is also a, you know,
proximate, personal, ov..., overseer of everything. So, He is present as the
Paramatma in the heart. And He cares for everyone. Of course, He is also a
judge.

        udāsīna-vad āsīnam

For those who do not want Him to intervene directly. But for those who turn
towards Him, He is personally there. So, "pravartate". That means Krishna is the
sustainer, also. He is not just the source. He is the sus..., sustainer, also.
You know. And then, "iti matvā". One who understand this. What happens to such a
person? "bhajante māṁ". That one who understands Krishna's position. "bhajante".
Now, Srila Prabhupada has already explained the word "bhajante" quite in detail
in the purport of 6.47.

        yoginām api sarveṣāṁ
        mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā
        śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ
        sa me yukta-tamo mataḥ

So, "bhajate". "bhajante". They are all from the same root. You know. The word
"bhajante" has also come. That there was "bhajate". The word "bha...", similarly
the "bhajante" has also come in, earlier in 9.13:

        mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha
        daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ
        bhajanty ananya-manaso
        jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

You know. So, "bhajante" means that, actually, Krishna is wholehearted. You
know. That, you know, you know, you know, that the devotee wholeheartedly offers
oneself to Krishna. So, it is not just some ritualistic worship. It is, you
know, you know, complete offering of one's heart. Oneself. And one's very being
to Krishna. So, here, "iti matvā bhajante māṁ". That person starts worshipping.
But in what way is the worship going on? "budhā". "budhā" mean the person
becomes intelligent. "budhā" is actually, the word "budhā" is related with the
"buddh...". "buddha. "buddha" is the enlightened one. So, "budhā" is also
similarly enlightened. And the word "budhā" is often constanted..., contrasted
with the word "mūḍhā". "mūḍhā" is a foolish person. "bhāva-samanvitāḥ".
"bhāva-samanvitāḥ" means that with, you know, the emotion of the heart. So, it
is not, the person does not do ritualistic worship. But "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". With
the emotion, one offers. So, "samanvitāḥ". Imbued with. With great attention.
So, "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". Now, you know, that means what? It is telling here the
knowledge of Krishna's position. What does that lead to? That makes the person
enlightened. And that person, that makes the person, you know, also, attracted
to offer the whole heart. So, in that sense, the head and the heart, both get
transformed and, you know, directed towards Krishna. The head becomes illumined.
That is "budhā". And the heart becomes transformed. That is "bhāva-samanvitāḥ",
"bhajante". So, in, now, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. Prabhupada,
the purport primarily focuses on, you know, substantiating the point that
Prabhupada, that Krishna is making that He is the source of everything. That He
is the Absolute Truth. And Prabhupada marshalls a remarkably impressive galaxy
of verses as supports for, you know, you know, this, you know, point that
Krishna is making. So, you know, we see Prabhupada quotes from various verses.
Let us look at how many verses he is quoting from. So, manda..., there is a
section, Atharva Veda, the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". We discussed earlier
quotations, also, in this book. So, what does he, he says?

        yo brahmāṇaṁ vidadhāti pūrvaṁ yo vai vedāṁś ca gāpayati sma kṛṣṇaḥ

So, it was Krishna who instructed Brahma and "pūrvaṁ", "pūrvaṁ yo vai vedāṁś ca
gāpayati". And it is He who gave knowledge, in the Vedic knowledge in the past.
So, again, the point that He is being made, indicating through, is that Krishna
is the source of all. So, now, what are the alternative sources that people may
conceive of? People may think Brahma is the source. Shiva is the source. But
here, this verse is indicating that, actually, you know, if Krishna gave
knowledge to Brahma, that means Brahma is not the sour..., Brahma is not the
ultimate source. Krishna must have been there before. Krishna is more
enlightened than Brahma. And Krishna gave knowledge to Brahma. So, that, and
then, again, so, this is from the "Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad". And Prabhupada
quotes again from the "Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad". What does "Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad" say?
"atha puruṣo". "atha jāḥ pur...":

        atha puruṣo ha vai nārāyaṇo ’kāmayata prajāḥ sṛjeyeti

So, you know, you know, "’kāma". You know. So, in their "atha", in the
beginning, it was "Nārāyaṇa" who desired to create, you know, you know, all
living beings. And then, it is described, when he said, desired, desired to
create all living beings, what happened? Then, actually, who all are created?
Here, we see, practically, the whole, who is who in the Vedic cosmology is
described over here. As all coming from "Nārāyaṇa".

        ārāyaṇād brahmā jāyate, nārāyaṇād prajāpatiḥ prajāyate, nārāyaṇād indro jāyate, nārāyaṇād aṣṭau vasavo jāyante, nārāyaṇād ekādaśa rudrā jāyante, nārāyaṇād dvādaśādityāḥ

So, here, Brahma, it is like, as I said, it is a who is who of the Vedic
cosmology. Brahma, you know, is the creator. Prajāpatiḥ as a subsequent pro...,
you know, progenitors. Very important people in the Vedic universe. Indra is
the, you know, chief among all the Gods. The "vasavo"s, Vasus are, you know,
the, you know, you know, important among the devatas again. And Shiva, of
course. Rudra, eleven Rudras, they are also coming from "Nārāyaṇa". And the
"Ādityas" are also coming from "Nārāyaṇa". The, and, then, Prabhupada makes the
point:

"This Nārāyaṇa is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa."

So, now, when, when this "Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad" is there, the point which is being
made is that from "Nārāyaṇa", everyone has come. Now, if we study the
description of the universes' origin. Which is given, o..., of not the exactly 
universes' origin. But the origin of the, you know, various, you know, living
beings in the universe. Including the prominent living beings. In the
"Bhāgavatam" itself, sometimes, different processes are described. So, it is not
necessar..., it is not that every time all the details within the process of
creation are, happen exactly identically. There can be variations. At different,
in different universes. That means, you know, actually, you know, you know,
Krishna does not have to, necessarily all the time, while unfolding the
universe, follow a rigid pattern. You know. Just as Krishna's pastimes can have
some variations.  Similarly, some things can be vary. So, when it is said that
from "Nārāyaṇa", Shiva came. Now, if we look at the "Bhāgavatam", we may say
that, actually, Shiva, Rudra, Rudra comes from the, from Brahmaji. It is
considered son of Brahma. So, how can it be said that from, you know, you know,
"Nārāyaṇa", Shiva has come? The point is here that it is by "Nārāyaṇa"'s
arrangement. And it is "Nārāyaṇa" who is the original source. So, we may say
that, you know, say, if so, one person emigrated from, you know, this
particular, from, say, in the early, you know, India, you know, it, to, say,
Afr..., fr..., to Siberia. You know. Not many Indians were there. And then, that
person gave birth to, you know, some people. And from then, the dynasty has
moved on. And the dyn..., hundreds of people after that. Hundreds, even
thousands of people. Then, what would we say? That now, there may be different
generations who have there gone on. But we will say, oh, from him, you know,
this king has come. You know. From him, this warrior has come. From him, this
business person has come. From him, this artist has come. So, it may not be that
all of them are directly his children. But they have all come from him. So, it
is in this sense that it is said that all these people come from "Nārāyaṇa".
"Nārāyaṇa" is the source, ultimately. But it is not necessarily that they, these
are directly born from "Nārāyaṇa". Although, that can also happen if that is
what the Lord wills in, you know, some other universes. You know. So, the
"Bhā...", the "Bhāgavatam" describes a particular genealogy. And the important
point is, this genealogy, it all comes from, it all comes from, you know,
Krishna. It all ultimately comes from Krishna who, because "Nārāyaṇa" also comes
from Krishna. So, the important point that is being made over here is that, it
is amaz..., He is the source of everyone. Now, "sṛjeyeti". "’kā...".
"’kāmayata". So, it is said that, the Lord come..., "’kāma...", "’kāmayata",
"sṛjeyeti". That Lord desired to create living entities. What does it refer to?
Now, we know that all, the souls are eternal. Then, the Lord does not create
in souls. Because the souls exist eternally. So, what is being referred to here?
It, this is not referring to anything at the spiritual level. The souls
are eternal, exist at the spiritual level. But this is referring to the, you
know, beginning of the universe. We know that the Lord is sleeping. And then,
you know, you know, say, you know, when Brahmaji is, also, Brahmaji's life ends.
At that time, the whole universe is destroyed. And when the universe is
destroyed, at that time, you know, you know, what happens is, you know, the,
when the universe is destroyed, you know, you know, the universal substratum
enters into Vishnu. You know. And then, after that, you know, when the Lord
desires again, then the universes start emanating from His body. And then, after
that, He glances. And the whole creation, you know, triggers off. So, that
moment, when the creation is going to start, that is what is being referred to
as "srjeyeti". So, it is not souls are being created. But the souls are becoming
embodied. Those souls who have already come to the material world. Or are
willing to come, or, or wanting to come to the material world. You know. For
them, the Lord gives body. So, this "srjeyeti" refers to, not His desire to
create new souls. But, you know, to start remanifesting the creation for
allowing the souls to play out their desires. And ultimately, come back to Him.
So, that is what is different to as the Lord's desire over here. Now, you know,
beyond that, you know, let us look at several other verses. You
know.

        brahmanyo devaki-putrah

"brahmanyo devaki-putrah". So, actually, you know, this is from the "Narayana
Upanisad". "brahmanyo". So, the Abs.., the Absolute Truth, the Brahman is
actually coming as "dev...", is the "devaki-putrah". You know. And then,
further, what is being said over here? In the, what was there at the origin?
This is from the "Maha Upanisad". "eko vai narayana".

        eko vai narayana asin na brahma nesano napo nagni-somau neme dyav-aprthivi na naksatrani na suryah

"eko vai narayana asin". In the beginning, there was only "Nārāyaṇa". Brahman
was not there. "nesano" refers to Shiva. He was not there. "napo". So, there was
no water. There was no fire. You know. You know. And then, there was no, you
know, you know, there was no, you know, stars in the sky. "naksatrani na
suryah". "na", "dyav-aprthivi". So, there was no, you know, you know, you know,
there was no "dyav", moon, also. So, "somau". "neme". "somau" refers to the
moon, "somau". Moon. So, like that, Prabhupada says, the point that is being
made is, there was no one there at that time. So, you know, again, now,
Prabhupada quotes from the "Moksa-dharma". "Moksa-dharma" is like an appendix to
the "Mahabharata".

        prajapatim ca rudram capy
        aham eva srjami vai
        tau hi mam na vijanito
        mama maya-vimohitau

So, "prajapatim ca rudram capy". So, Krishna is saying that Rudra and the
"prajapatim", they are all created by Me. But those who do not know this. But
those who not know Me. "mam na vijanito". So, what does this indicate is, what
does this state of such a person? "mama maya-vimohitau". You know. People do not
know this because they are deluded by My "maya". Then, Prabhupada quotes from
the "Varaha Purana" here. What does the "Varaha Purana" say?

        narayanah paro devas
        tasmaj jatas caturmukhah
        tasmad rudro ’bhavad devah
        sa ca sarva-jñatam gatah

So, "nar...", you know, so, from "narayanah", "jatas", is, "narayanah" is the
"paro devas". So, He is the Supreme among all the Gods. And from Him was born?
"caturmukhah". "caturmukhah" refers to Brahmaji. And from him comes "rudro". And
"rudro" eventually became "sarva-jñatam gatah". He became omniscient. Now, you
know, what does it mean when we say Vi..., Shiva became omniscient? Actually,
there are levels of omniscience, also. 25:08
