Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vR1mKzKeqiI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=FbjA8SIHRyTnxKeYYqlh2azHGFF8MTU0ODQ4OTMyNkAxNTQ4NDAyOTI2&v=vR1mKzKeqiI&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_112_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_11_Text_32_to_35_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Eleventh Chapter. The last chapter we discussed about, in the last class,
we discussed about Arjuna's description of the vision of the universal form.
And, you know, first, he was describing the universal form. Then, he described
the reactions of the various residents, you know, you know, to the perception of
the universal form. Then, he described his own emotions. And then, after that,
he described, the, suddenly, the vision comes down on the battlefield. And he
sees the various warriors there getting destroyed. Devoured. So, we discussed
there about the significance of the destructive aspect of God. So, God de...,
you know, destroys the temporary to make way for the eternal. And then, Arjuna
concluded with the question, who are You? So, from verse 32 onwards, you know,
the "viśva-rūpa" speaks. So, actually, it is Krishna itself. That says the
Bhaga..., "Sañjaya" does not say "śrī-viśva-rūpa uvāca". He says "śrī-bhagavān
uvāca". So, let us see what He says. You know.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        kālo ’smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho
        lokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ
        ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve
        ye ’vasthitāḥ praty-anīkeṣu yodhāḥ

So, "kālo ’smi". Time I am. And what have I come for? "loka-kṣaya-kṛt
pravṛddho". I have come for destroying the worlds. So, Kri..., Arjuna had asked
two questions. You know. "ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo". Who are You? You
know. And second was "na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim". I do not know what is
Your purpose. So, in that sense, the question also includes, what is Your
purpose? I want to know. So, in the first line, itself, both are described
succinctly. "kālo ’smi". I am time. Time I am. The destroyer of all the worlds.
And what have I done? I have come here for "loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho".
"loka-kṣaya". For destruction of the whole worlds. "kṛt pravṛddho". "lokān
samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ". So, all the worlds will be engaged in destruction.
All the worlds means, the principle kings of the worlds will be engaged in
destruct..., mutual destruction. And then:

        ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve
        ye ’vasthitāḥ praty-anīkeṣu yodhāḥ

So, "praty-anīkeṣu yodhāḥ" is all those warriors who are assembled over here,
they will be destroyed. You know. And "ṛte ’pi tvāṁ". "ṛte ’pi", "ṛte" can mean
except for you. Or it can mean without you. So, except for you means, actually,
everybody will be destroyed. But you will not be destroyed. So, we know that the
Kauravas were defeated. And the Pandavas were victorious. And when, you know,
you know, "Karṇa" fell on the 17th day. Shalya became the commander for the 18th
day. And Shalya was killed by "Yudhiṣṭhira". And after that, you know, the few
remains of, you know, you know, Duryodhana's soldiers tried to fight. And
Shakuni was killed by Sahadeva. At that time, Duryodhana fled. And then, he was
hiding under a lake. And, you know, you know, "Bhīma" found him. Challenged him.
And defeated him. And he was, he was, he were laid mortally wounded dying. So,
at that time, the Pandavas thought they had won the war. But that night,
"Aśvatthāmā" came. And brutally slaughtered, the, all the Kaurava warriors. So,
the, all the Pandava warriors. However, because of that tradition, that the
warriors who win the war, in order to sort of proclaim their victory. And lay
their claim on the, you know, land which they have won, the tradition was that
they sleep on the battlefield. On the battleground. So, they, you know, Pandavas
were sleeping on the battleground. And the, you know, the remaining soldiers who
were in the camp. You know. Soldiers. Warriors. Commanders. Everyone. So, they
were slaughtered by "Aśvatthāmā" with vica..., with "Kŗtavarmā". And
Kripacharya. And, you know, in this way, practically, everybody was killed. So,
the five Pandavas remained. Even the Pandava's sons were killed. Apart from
that, the only persons who remained were, you know, these three people.
"Aśvatthāmā". "Kŗta...", "Kŗtavarmā". And "Vik...". And, you know, "Kṛpa". And
from the Pandava's side, Krishna was still there. Then, "Sātyaki" was a "Yadava"
warrio..., warrior. Who, the only "Yadava" warriors who fought in the Kaurava,
in the war were "Sātyaki" on the side of the Pandavas. And "Kŗtavarmā" on the
side of the Kauravas. "Kŗtavarmā" was the commander of the Narayani Sena. And
along with the Narayani Sena, he came to fight. When Narayani Sena was chosen by
Duryodhana. Before the war took place. So, he also came. And "Sātyaki" was a
very close friend, you know, student of Arjuna. Friend and student. You know. He
had, he, he had also been at the, you know, gurukula of "Droṇā". And he had
learnt some things over there. But Arjuna had honed, you know, had, had honed
his skills through those, you know, intense training while Arjuna was in, you
know, Dwarka. So, they were very close. "Sātyaki" had also fought. "Sātyaki" was
there in the same place where the Pandavas were resting for the night. So,
these, you know, that means, practically, only these seven people. The five
Pandavas. You know. "Sātyaki" and Krishna on the side of the, you know,
Kaurav..., on Pandavas. And then, you know, these "Kŗtavarmā". "Kṛpa". And, you
know, "Aśvatthāmā" on the side of the Kauravas. And of course, there was one,
one more Kaurava who was actually a half son. Or, ha..., or, or a half brother
of the hundred Kauravas. So, he had been born, you know, from "Dhṛtarāṣṭra"
through a maidservant. And he had defected over to the Pandavas just before the
war had started. And he performed the final rites of all the Kauravas. So, he
also survived. So, practically, nobody survived.

        ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve

So, except for you, everybody will be destroyed. Now, you know, that means the
"kalarupa" is coming. And the "kalarupa" is ferocious for the materialist. And,
but for the devotees, the "kalarupa" is not ferocious. Just like Nrsimhadeva was
ferocious for the d..., d..., demons. But Nrsimhadeva was the abode of love for
Prahlad. And the same Nrsimhadeva who was roaring, like a fero..., fearsome,
frightening lion, started paring and passing like a gentle cat. When Prahlad
came in front of him, he offered obeisances. And then, "Nrsimhadeva" touched his
hand on Prahlad's head. So, we see, there is two pictures of "Nrsimhadeva". One
is roaring. Very fearsome. The other is smiling. Putting the hand of Prahlad.
So, you know, there is a famous verse from, you know, Shreedhar Swami whose
"istadeva" was Nrsimha. He said:

        anugra api ugra evayam

So, he said:

        potanam svakesari

Just as a lion is, is extremely fierce for everyone, except her own cubs.
Similarly, a, you know, the Lord Nar..., Lord in the form of "Nrsimhadeva" is
fierce for everyone. But not for His devotees. So, same way, here, also, you
know, actually, you know, the "ugra". The "Nara...", the "Virata rupa" does not
destroy the Pandavas. And "ṛte ’pi tvāṁ". Except for you. That is one way of
understanding it. And the "ṛte ’pi" can mean, another explanation is, even
without you. "ṛte" can mean without. The, what does it mean? It means that even
if you do not fight. Still, I have come here as time. And I am going to destroy
everyone. So, that means the destruction of the warriors is already ordained.
By divine arrangement. And even if you do not do it, you think that, oh, you
know, I do. I will not fight. I will not en..., curse in full reactions. I will
not kill my relatives. Still, their killing is already ordained. And that is
going to happen. You cannot stop that. That is the emphasis of "ṛte ’pi tvāṁ".
So, now, you know, here, there is an interesting verse from the "Kaṭha
Upaniṣad". Which also illustrates the point of how the Lord's glory is
all-sided. So:

        yasya brahma ca kṣatraṁ ca
        ubhe bhavata odanaḥ
        mṛtyur yasyopasecanaṁ
        ka itthā veda yatra saḥ

So, now, here, it is said that, it is quite a scary verse in one way. "yasya
brahma ca kṣatraṁ ca". That means brahmanas and ksatriyas. "ubhe bhavata
odanaḥ". So, they are all consumed. Devoured like a mill by the Supre..., meal
by the Supreme. "mṛtyur yasyopasecanaṁ". So, that, actually, as time, as time,
as the form of death actually consumes everyone. And who can know such a form of
the Absolute Truth? What does it mean? It, you know, again, we may have some
d..., disturbing notions of, you know, cannibalism over here. You know. Ca...,
you know, one thing is non-vegetarianism. Non-vegetarianism is to eat meat. But
cannibalism is to eat human flesh. Which is barbaric. It is outlawed according
to international law. And the practice might be there in some remote places. But
it is quite a barbaric idea for any civilised person. So, what, what, how, what
to speak of any human being doing it? Then, what to, a human being doing itself
is horrible. What to speak of the idea of God doing something like that? So, in
fact, you know, you know, a few yea..., you know, a year ago or so, there was a
court case in Russia. Where, you know, you know, the ROCs. The Russian Orthodox
Church. You know. Which wants sort to have monopoly on religion in Russia. You
know. Which tried to ban the Hare Krishna. Ban the "Bhagavad-gītā As It Is" of
Srila Prabhupada. And one of the reasons that they gave was this, this kind of
description. They said, they worshi..., these Bha..., these cu..., these people
worship a God who, who, you know, He drinks blood. And eats people. So, this is
a, this is, this is a barbaric cult. And, you know, we should not allow such a
cult to have any presence in In..., in our country. So, that was their argument.
So, actually, this is such a, you know, such a weak and, you know, distorted
argument, you know, without any philosophical context. Actually, if we look at
any scripture. If somebody wants to, you know, distort things out of context.
Then, anywhere and everywhere, that can be, doubt, distortion can be there. You
know. If we, if we look in the Bible. We will find that, especially in the Old
Testament that whenever the kings conquer any kingdom, what do they do? First
thing is that, they go and destroy the idols. Over there, in the temple. Their
idea is these are false Gods. And not only do they destroy the idols. There are
descriptions where, you know, in the Bible, where, say, for example, God, you
know, you know, God tells that this particular tribe is, you know, is a
contamination on the race. And you should not mix this with tribe. Otherwise,
your race will become defiled. And to ensure that there is no one become
contaminated. Actually, the who..., God orders. God orders means, one of the
messengers of, one of the persons who is considered to be a prophet, a messenger
of God. That person comes and says that this whole tribe should be killed. And
then, these people who are supposed to be the messengers of God. Who are
supposed to be the ambassadors of love, what if they just fall upon this whole
tribe. And not only the men. The women and the children, all of them are
slaughtered. And that is called as a cleansing operation. So, this horrible
description is there in the Bible. Similarly, similarly, in the Quran, we will
see these things. You know. In the Quran, also. You know. There is often
ruthless killing. Which happens at several places. So, you know, you know, there
are some jews over there. And one, some groups of jews surrender. Some, there
is, you know, in when, Muhammad con..., conquers Medina. And some groups of jews
fight. So, those who fight. They are defeated. And they are killed. And those
who decide they will not fight. They will surrender. After they surrender and put
down their weapons, you know, you know, the muslims are ordered, you kill all of
them. And those defenseless people who have voluntarily surrendered, then they
are brutally slaughtered. So, now, there are different interpretations. There
are different contextualisations. Some people context whether that it literally
means killing. Whatever different mean..., good, different meanings for that.
But the point is if Gen..., Genezis just goes into the literalistic explanation
of things, then every scripture in the world can be faulted. And we see that, if
we look at the Mahabharata war per say. The first and foremost point is that the
Mahabharata goes to exhaustible length to describe very clearly how ungodly, how
cruel, how vicious the Kauravas were. And it also goes to great length to
describe how godly, how conciliatory, how tolerant the Pandavas were. And the
Pandavas tried the, all possible means to avoid confrontation. Even Krishna
Himself went as "Shanti Dut". And nothing worked at that, aft..., you know, only
after that, they chose to have the war. You know. And it was not their choice.
It was a necessity for them. And that necessity was not just so that they would
themselves become the kings. That necessity was also because the world needed
godly administrators. So, it is all combined together which came over there. You
know. Which resulted in the war. You know. But this particular description, so,
first is the war is necesssary. So that, you know, there could be, you know, you
know, righteous administrator. Administration. Righteous government on the
surface of the earth. But beyond that, in the specific context of the war, the
Bhagavad Gita is a philosophical discussion. And within that philosophical
discussion, this is a revelation that is given. So, you know, this is a
revelation which is not to be taken literalistically. Yes. The point of the
"Virata rupa" is, Prabhupada also makes the point in his earlier purports. The
"Virata rupa" is not eternal. You know. There are, "viśva-rūpa" is not eternal.
In the spiritual world, in Vaikuntha, there is no, there is Goloka. There is
Ayodhya. But there is no "viśva-rūpa" loka. There is no form. There is no, you
know, planet where this particular form exists eternally. And there are the
devotees of this particular form worshiping eternally. No. This is a, this is a
temporary revelation which is meant to demonstrate the point of God's vibhuti.
How He pervades everything and exists everywhere. It is that which is
demonstrated by this form. And that is the highlight. Not anything else.

So, it is a revelation which is given. And within the revelation, through a,
a metaphorical way, what is demonstrated is that ultimately, everybody is going
to be destroyed. And we should not destr..., we should divorce destruction from
the jurisdiction of God. Just like a king may be very virtuous. But there is a
prison, also. And in the prison, you know, the pr..., each prisoners often are
there for punishment. So, the, just because the king is virtuous does not mean
that there will be no prisoners over there. So, similarly, in this material
world, destruction is a reality of life. And that reality cannot be denied or
rejected. Nor cannot be di..., can it divorced from the overall understanding
of, you know, you know, God, who, whose jurisdiction exists over everything in
nature. So, it is not that God has a particular vendetta by which He destroys
some people. Nor is it that, you know, He is cannibalistic. Simple point is this
metaphorical destruction is to, you know, you know, reg..., indicate how
everyone is in the jurisdiction, you know, everything that happens in nature is
within the jurisdiction of, you know, the Absolute Truth. So, you know, in, now,
peo..., even people are destroyed, their destruction is not because of, you
know, you know, God's malevolence. Their destruction is because of the, those
people's owm bad karma. Because of which, they have to face destruction. So, let
us look at the next verse now. So, once Arjuna understands that, ok, this
destruction is going to happen. Then, what? You know.

        tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva
        jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ samṛddham
        mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva
        nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin

So, "tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha". Therefore, oh, Arjuna, arise. What is the meaning of
therefore? Actually, therefore means, from the previous verse, it was said that,
see, all of them are going to die. You are not going to die. Except for you
would mean that that you are not going to die. Your victory. You know. So, it,
it was implied in the previous verse. And it will be explicitly said in this
verse that you are not going to die. Others going to die. That means if there
is a war, the other party is going to die. You are not going to die. That means,
that means you will emerge victorious. So, "tasmāt". So, that will be said
therefore. And it will further clear instead. "tvam uttiṣṭha ". Arise. "yaśo
labhasva". Attain victory. You know. "tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva".
"jitvā śatrūn". Conquer over your enemy. "jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ
samṛddham". "bhuṅkṣva". "bhuṅkṣva" is enjoy. So, normallly, we say that devotees
should not enjoy anything. We are not meant to enjoy. We are meant to serve.
Yes. That is true. But even within service, there is enjoyment. So, it is not
that Krishna wants a, to de..., us to be deprived of all enjoyment. Actually,
Krishna wants us, you know, to stop depriving ourselves of enjoyment. Real
enjoyment is at the spiritual level. In our nature, as souls, in our natural
activity as parts of Krishna who lovingly serve Him. So, as long as we act in
material consciousness. And seek sense gratification. We deprive ourselves of
enjoyment. So, you know, you know, you know, actually, reg..., regulation, and
destri..., and restriction is not meant to deprive us of enjoyment. It is meant
to end our deprivation of enjoyment. So, there is some enjoyment at the material
level. There is real enjoyment at the spiritual level. So, you know, as long as
we are caught in seeking enjoyment at the material level, then we cannot relish
life at the spiritual level. Because our consciousness is caught over here. So,
when this is regulated, then our consciousness becomes free. It becomes
purified. It rises through a spiritual level. And we can enjoy the spiritual
level in relationship with Krishna. And when we practice devotional life, it is
not that we enjoy, only at the spiritual level. You know. There is, you know, a,
there is, for a devotee, you know, enjoyment within the service of the Lord even
inthe material world. That is not material enjoyment. You know. Devotee, you
know, you know, for example, when a devotee builds a big temple. For the
glorification of the Lord. That is, that is in one sense in the material world.
Geographically, it is at a particular place in a particular country. We could
say this in the material world. But the devotee gets great happiness over there.
In doing that. So, "bhuṅkṣva". Arjuna, you are going to rule, you know, conquer
and rule this kingdom. And you enjoy this prosperous kingdom. So, "jitvā
śatrūn". So, "jitvā śatrūn". Conquer all your enemies. "bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ
samṛddham". And you are, once your enemies are destroyed, your kingdom will
become prosperous. And you can enjoy that prosperous kingdom. "mayaivaite". By
My arrangement, "nihatāḥ". Destroyed. "pūrvam eva". "pūrvam eva". In the past,
only. That means by My prior arrangement, the enemies are destroyed. So,
nowadays, people have this whole, you know, you know, you know, whole scandal
about match-fixing. That means some mat..., people are, players are playing a
match. But they have already been paid. Some players are paid to underperform.
Or perform in a particular way, so that the match result will go in a particular
way. So, when Krishna is saying, like this, by My arrangement, they are already
killed. Is this an example of match-fixing? The whole "Kurukṣetra" battle is
going to trigger. But its battle fixing. Krishna has decided that, that the
Kau..., Pandavas are going to be victorious. The Kauravas are going to be f...,
you know, f..., be defeated. So, is this a matter, matter of battle fixing? See,
the important point is not fixing. The point, important point here is of, you
know, not, not of fixing the battle. The important point is fixing of our
consciousness. See, the whole purpose of the Bhagavad Gita is to fix Arjuna's
consciousness and devotion. In this world, whatever God wants to do, He can do
without us, also.

You know. Even if God want..., if Krishna wants to build a temple, He can build
the temple without any of us. If Krishna wants to spread His message, He can
spread it without any of us. He can, He is present as the Supersoul in the heart
of people. And, you know, one revelation. One inspiration. One conviction which
the Supersoul grants can transform people far more thoroughly and permanently
than what the biggest lectures that the best preachers can give. So, Krishna
does not need us for anything. So, in that sense, we could say that the results
are fixed by Krishna. But Krishna can do whatever He wants, Himself. But Krishna
is not just concerned with results at the material level. Krishna is concerned
with transformations at the spiritual level, also. So, at, this transformation
at the spiritual level means, He is concerned with fixing our consciousness. In
His devotional service. By which, we become purified. Elevated. And liberated.
So, the word match-fixing is used to result, is used to talk about, you know,
you know, say, sports matches. In which, the result is fixed. But the word
match-fixing can be used in another way. That actually, you know, there are,
there is the concept of marriage matches. And matches are fixed, also. You know.
Ok. This boy should get married to this girl. So, ultimately, you know, the, you
know, the original and the eternal romance is between the soul and the Lord. So,
the match-fixing that the Lord is really interested in is our e..., reviving our
eternal relationship with Him. In enabling us to rev..., revive our love for
Him. And return back to Him. So, whatever external situations are there. The
challenges are there. The service opportunities are there. All of them are meant
as facilities so that we can fix our consciousness more on Him. So, "mayaivaite
nihatāḥ pūrvam eva". So, this is an additional impetus. The knowledge that, you
know, by Krishna's arrangement, all the opponents are already killed is not a,
you know, not a, a license for passivity. It is not, Prabhupada said in a
lecture, Arjuna did not tell Krishna, Krishna, anyway, You have killed everyone.
Already, You are God. You can kill everyone. And You killed everyone, only. So,
let You kill, let You kill everyone. I will sit. And I will drink "Bhang". No.
Prabhupada mimic some people. You know. Some religious people. Who, who do all
sorts of activities in the name of religion. And he says, no, Krishna did not
say that, Arjuna did not say that. Arjuna took up the responsibility. So, the
idea is to assure..., is to offer an assurance. Not to offer a license. A
license means, you can do whatever you want. No. Assurance means, you should do
this, but if you have some hesitation. Whether this will lead to success or not.
I am offering you assurance. By My arrangement, success will be there.
"mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva". And therefore, what should you do?
"nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin". "bhava sav...", so, "nimitta-mātraṁ". Become
an instrument. Now, it is interesting that sometimes, if you say, if you just
become an instrument. Then, it see..., it may seem to be demeaning for some
people. Why demeaning? You know. I am my own person. And I can do my own things.
Why should I just become an instrument for somebody else? I will do my own
things. Yes. We can do our own things. But the fact is that our own intelligence
is never as good as God's intelligence. And often, whatever we do, it may well
end up creating more problems than it solves. You know. We have discussed this
earlier how, you know, what is the best thing that, you know, the scientists can
do to help heal the ecology of the world.

You know. The best thing that they can do is stop doing anything. Why stop doing
anything? Because nature has its own capacity to heal. And much of what we are
doing is wounding nature. You know. We are exploiting natural resources.
Destabilising the ecological balances. You know. You know. Re..., extensive
deforestation. So many things we are doing. Which is actually ruining the
environment. So, you know, you know, what do we need to do? Stop interfering
with nature. Nature will heal itself. So, the point which I am making is not
that we have to go back. And, you know, put and say no to all scientific
progress. That is a cultural issue which requires a broad discussion. The
essential point is, whatever culture we are in, we should try to serve Krishna.
But the specific point which I am making over here is that all of us are meant
to serve Krishna. And, you know, in serving Krishna, we do the best justice to
our talents. And we bring about the best results. When we act according to our
own plans, then our, because our plans and our intelligence is finite. The
results that can come from them are also at best, you know, mediocre. You know,
the, if you want to, you know, the results that truly do good to everyone, we
simply should become instruments for God's plan. And when we become instruments
for Krishna's plan, by that, you know, our intelligence becomes complemented.
Completed. You know. And perfected by Krishna's intelligence. So, our
intelligence is this much. But Krishna's intelligence is infinite. And then, we
can do wonderful things. So, when Krishna says "nimitta-mātraṁ", He does not
minimise Arjuna in that. He immediately, He complements it by saying
"savya-sācin". "savya-sācin" means you are, you know, you are very skilled. You
know. For an archer to be skilled, shot, shooting, that itself is extraordinary.
Arjuna was so skilled. That even at night in darkness, he could shoot arrows
accurately and hit targets. You know. So, that was his skill. And that itself is
extraordinary. He was the best archer in the world. But not only was he the best
archer. He was ambidextrous. Ambidextrous means, he could shoot exa..., equally
well with both hands. So, you know, normally, the archers will shoot like this.
With the right hand. Left hand. But he could shoot with the left hand. Right
hand, also. Both ways. So, he was, so that ambidextrousness was additional
virtue.  And through the address "Savyasācī", Krishna is acknowledging Arjun's
expertise. So, it is not that when we become devoted to God, our expertise and
our abilities are to be of no use. No, our abilities are to be used. And they
are acknowledged. Even in devotee circle. If some devotee has singing ability.
Some devotee has managerial ability. Some devotee has, you know, speaking
ability. So, different devotees can have different abilities. And they can be
used in Krishna's service. In fact, they attain their perfection when used in
Krishna's service. So, "nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin". Become an instrument
in this battle. So, through this verse, Krishna is telling Arjuna that this
whole world is moving according to a plan. Prabhupada writes in the purport that
people think that everything is happening by chance. But no. Everything is
happening by plan. And our perfection is to understand that plan. And cooperate
with that plan. Now, we may wonder, how can I know what is God's plan? Is God
going to come and tell me? That this is My plan? Cooperate with it? Or is it
that whatever senior devotees tell me, that is my plan? That is my plan? Now,
somebody says, the spiritual master's instructions are the p..., are Krishna's
plan. But we may not have access to spiritual master's instructions, also. So,
the important point is that there are broad aspects of Krishna's plan. And when
we take care of those broad aspects. Then, the specific aspects take care of
themselves. That means that when we take care of the, for example, our direct
connection with Krishna. We ensure that we study scriptures properly. We do our
sadhana properly. Then, through these, we show Krishna that we want to serve
Him. When we express our desire to serve Him in this, such a way, then other
times, also, Krishna gives us intelligence of how best we can serve Him. So, you
know, when it is clear to us how we should serve Krishna. At that time, we
should clearly serve Krishna. And then, when it is not clear how we can serve
Krishna, at that time, Krishna will also give us guidance of how we can serve
Him. So, we do when it is, first of all, when things are clear, we show Krishna
that, yes, I want to serve You. By clearly doing those activities. And then,
when, then, there, Krishna will reveal to us. Externally. Internally. In His own
ways. He will reveal. Ok. This is what I want You to do. So, we should not go
into a paralysis by analysis, more thinking what is Krishna's plan. We should
think, ok, whatever opportunities for service I have, I should take these
opportunities. And the more I serve Krishna, more I saw, serve Krishna, Krishna
see..., sees my sincere intention. The more Krishna will reveal opportunities
for service to me. And will guide me to make the best choices for myself. So,
serving Krishna is, it may seem, especially, especially with respect to sharing
Krishna Consciousness with others. Or even practicing Krishna Consciousness
ourselves. It may seem like mission impossible. 31:13
