Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jVl7Jzu-4LQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=jVl7Jzu-4LQ&redir_token=KoXFTEtAXnd40T5iLtv6P2OdT1x8MTU0ODQ4ODQ4MUAxNTQ4NDAyMDgx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_090_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_13_to_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in the middle of the Seventh Chapter right now. So, let us look at the verse
which start off with 7.13. So, we completed the first section. The Seventh
Chapter has, you know, three sections. First is knowledge about Krishna. And
then, the second section from 13 to 25 is about, how, kno..., you know,
knowledge of Krishna leads to surrender. And He talks about people who
surrender. People who do not surrender. And people who surrender to something
other than Krishna. So, let us start with:

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat
        mohitaṁ nābhijānāti
        mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

So, "tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair". So, there are three modes. Filled with the three
modes. Made of the three modes. Comprising of these three existences. That is
"bhāvair".

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

This whole world is "mohitaṁ". Everything in this world. Everyone in this world
is bewildered. You know. By "mohitaṁ". By the three modes. "na abhijānāti". We
have to not kn..., know. What do they not know? "mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam". That
I am "param". I am transcendental. And I am imperishable. "param avyayam". So,
here, Krishna is talking about the three mode..., His posi..., His relationship
with the three modes. And Krishna is emphasising the point that He is beyond the
three modes. His position is transcendental. Always. So, "tribhir guṇa-mayair
bhāvair". We have these three modes. But, you know, Krishna's position is
transcendental thre..., three modes. And in fact, it is Kr..., it is the three
modes which cause the bewilderment. And which make people forget, you know, you
know, Kri..., you know, a, misunderstand Krishna. Forget Krishna. "mohitaṁ
nābhijānāti". "na abhijānāti". So, you know, how, how do the modes cause
forgetfulness of Krishna? See, the modes color our perception of everything.
Now, if I have a red tinted glasses, everything will seem, you know, seem red to
me. So, the modes themselves comprise different tinting, of different color
tinted glasses. So, goodness is one ki..., one kind of, you know, you know,
tinted glass. Passion is the, one kind of tinted glass. Ignorance is one kind of
tinted glass. And all these three are different glasses. And they all cause a
different kind of tinting. But more, tinting means coloring. Contamination of
our vision. Now, beyond that, in general, all the three modes are material. So,
overall, there is a material covering. There is a material contamination. A
material distortion of our perception. And because of that, we cannot understand
Krishna's transcendental position. "mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam". Krishna is
saying, you know, "param". I am transcendentally situated. And "avyayam". So,
Krishna i..., "avyayam" means imperishable. So, transcendental and imperishable.
You know. So, Krishna is, you know, a, in, beyond the limits of time and space.
So, "param" can be correlated with the limits of space. You know. "avyayam" can
be correlated with the time, limit of time. Everything in this world is, you
know, limited by time and space. But Krishna is transcendental to the
limitations of time and space. "mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam". H..., and now,
Prabhupada talks about, in the purport that h..., how there are, you know, you
know, even people in goodness are bewildered about Krishna. How do we see that?
We see that in Tenth Canto of the Srimad Bhagavatam where practically everyone,
you know, the demigods like Indra. Even Brahma. You know. And even Shiva. You
know, Shiva. You know. There is no description directly of Shiva being
bewildered in Vrindavan. But later on, Shiva takes the side of Banasura. And
then, later on, when Shiva Juara is defeated by Narayan Juara in the fight of
Banasura's forces with Krishna's forces. At that time, Shiva surrenders and
offers prayers. So, in this way, actually, everybody, you know, is bewildered by
the three modes. You know. So, the contaminations of three modes prevents us
from understanding what actually reality is. And that causes us to stay in
illusion. You know. And now, you know, people talk about illusion in relative
terms, also. That means, a drunkard thinks that, you know, alcohol is a source
of happiness.

Although alcohol is a source of bondage and misery. So, like that, there are
illusions within the material world, also. Within the material world, there are
different things which seem pleasurable. But turn to be out miserable
afterwards. So, that is true. But what Krishna is talking about over here is
something much greater. Actually, Krishna is talking about, how, in this world,
everyone is overcome by illusion with respect to understanding Him. You know.
The illusions e..., with respect to things of this world get us into material
bondage. They may cause us, you know, if that person is in passion. And then,
the person gets addicted to alcohol. That person may go into ignorance. And
sometimes, the person may be in ignorance. Maybe, addicted to something. And by
some laborious efforts, by willpower, some therapy, may become sober and give up
addiction. So, that person will remove, will be freed from the ignorance of
ignorance. The ignorance of ignoran..., or the illusion of ignorance. Illusion
caused by the mode of ignorance. But still, that person may still have an
illusion of passion. Nothing else. Now, I am freed from addiction. Now, I can
work hard. And I can make it big in life. I will have a big house. And his
family. And I will be happy in life. So, that does an illusion in passion. So,
you know, there may be movement through various kinds of illusions from passion
down to ignorance. And from ignorance down to passion. Or even to goodness. But
overall, the person stays in illusion. As long as we do not understand about
Krishna properly, we stay in illusion. So, the three modes, they may cause their
own in..., you know, individual illusions. But beyond that, the three modes also
cause illusion about Krishna. And that illusion is what Krishna is focusing on
over here. Because, you know, that is the illusion that keeps us in bondage in
material existence. Now, naturally, the question will come up, ok, if, you know,
the modes bind the person, and keep the person under illusion, then how can such
a person come out of illusion? That, Srila Prabhupada describes, you know, in
his purport in the next verse. And Krishna answers first in the next verse of
that, also. So:

        daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī
        mama māyā duratyayā
        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

H..., m..., "daivī hy", divine indeed. "eṣā guṇa-mayī". That actually, this
energy of Krishna is divine indeed. "mama māyā duratyayā". This is my "māyā".
And it is "duratyayā". Very difficult to overcome. "mām eva ye prapadyante". But
those who surrender unto Me.

        mām eva ye prapadyante
        māyām etāṁ taranti te

They will cross beyond "māyā". And come out, cross beyond "māyā". They will come
out of illusion. You know. Hmm. So, here, what is Krishna saying exactly? You
know. In the previous verse, Krishna has stated that, you know, in "māy...",
that:

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

So, He said that, the three, the covering of the three modes deludes everyone.
Now, He is taking that understanding further. And He is saying, so, that means,
the 13th verse is saying how the covering of the three modes prevents the living
entities from understanding Him. So, if we consider the three-level
hierarchy, what does 13th say? 13th say that the l..., living entities are here.
At a lower level. The three modes are covering the living entities. And that is
why, they cannot, you know, the living entities cannot understand Krishna. So,
say, we have the sun. We have the clouds. And we have the observers on the
earth. People on the earth. So, when the clouds are there, the clouds block the
perception of the sun for the observers on the earth. So, now, it may appear as
if the clouds are covering the sun. But the sun is inifinite. And the sun can,
sun is not infinite. But sun is far greater than the clouds. Sun cannot be
covered. What is covered is the observers' vision. So, Krishna is telling that,
He is, I, He is like the sun. He is, he has told in the previous verse, "param
avyayam". He is transcendental. He is inexhaustible. Imperishable. So, it is
not, who, He that is covered. It is actually, m..., we who are covered. Now,
beyond that, Krishna is telling something more in this verse. That, actually,
this covering is also under His control. So, the 13th said that there is a
covering of the three modes which prevents us from perceiving. Now, Krishna, in
the 14th verse, takes the point further. And says, this covering is, actually,
you know, not something that is independent of Krishna. This covering is under
Krishna. And this covering is due to Krishna's energy. So, m..., m..., "mama
māyā duratyayā". "mama māyā". Krishna is saying this is my "māyā". It is my
"māyā" which is putting the living entities under illusion. So, He is intri...,
He has talked about the three modes in the previous verse.

        tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair
        ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

That by the three modes, everybody is deluded. And now, He is saying that,
actually, His "māyā" is made about these three modes. "guṇa-mayī". "guṇa-mayī".
He says. Now, and He says, this is "daivī". "daivī" means divine indeed. So, why
divine? Because we may say that, actually, it is "māyā" which makes us, peo...,
makes people do demoniac things. "māyā" is what makes peo..., drives people away
from Krishna towards, you know, you know, you know, bad things. So, if "māyā"
takes people away people towards wrong things, then why should "māyā" be
considered to be divine? You know. You know. "māyā" makes people lusty. "māyā"
makes people greedy. "māyā" makes peo..., people, you know, angry. And all the,
you know, absurdities and perversities, that people engage in are ultimately
caused by maya. So, then, how can "māyā" be considered to be divine? See, the
absurdities and perversities, you know, in people's actions are not caused by
"māyā". They are, you know, facilitated by "māyā". They are caused by people's
own free will. So, we have discussed earlier the example of a multiple choice
paper. In a multiple choice paper, that mean four options. And one of them is
right. Remaining three are wrong. Remaining four may be wrong. So, when they are
wrong like this, who is making them wrong? Is it the teacher or the student? The
teacher is providing the options. But the teacher also provides the education
for choosing the right options. And the student is responsible for the wrong
choice. The student cannot tell the teacher that, you know, you give the wrong
options. And I simply think what are the options that you give. So, if I get
poor marks, you are responsible. Not me. No. So, "māyā" gives these options. But
it is we who tick the choices. And if we take guidance from guru, sadhu,
shastra, we will not tick the wrong choices. We will tick the right choices. So,
the purpose of the teacher is not to fail the student. But to promote the
student. And if the student fails, that is primarily because the student does
not understand. You know. Student does not understand what? Student does not
understood the subject properly. Student did not study the subject properly.
Student did not apply of the intelligence while pass..., while passing the exam.
So, in this way, we can understand what is righ..., you know, what is the cause
of the suff..., problem. The problem is not caused by "māyā". You know. The, the
setup by which the illusions are present, the temptations are present, they are
created by m..., that setup is created by "māyā". But it is we who choose to go
into "māyā". And it is we who choose to stay out of "māyā". And each of us has
the power to stay out of "māyā" if we want. Hmm. Hmm. So, now, when we move
forward, you know:

        mama māyā duratyayā

Krishna is saying, this is my energy. So, it is called divine. Because it is,
the purpose ultimately, it is servi..., a, serving, is positive. It is a good
purpose. Just like, the purpose of the exam, ultimately, is good. Although for
some students, the exam may result in a, you know, poo..., poor or bad result.
The students fail in the exam. And they, if, you know, wha..., you know, this
exam, I have failed. And they may become dejected by that. And the failure may
reflect on, you know, their career as negative. But overall, the purpose of the
exam is to help them make positive development in a career. So, Krish...,
"daivī". It is divine. It is c..., because it is connected with Krishna, this
energy is considered divine. And "duratyayā". Hmm. "duratyayā" means that this
energy is actually very difficult to overcome. "duratyayā". "mama māyā". Krishna
says, my energy. And it is difficult to overcome. Prabhupada gives the example
for this "mama māyā". He says that, h..., when a parent wants to, you know,
discipline a child. The parent may, you know, engage a tutor. And the parent
loves the child. But the tutor may be a disciplinary. May be strict. To ensure
that the chur..., child gets educated properly. So, the parent is like the, you
know, like Krishna. And the, you know, tut..., restrict tutor is like "māyā".
So, "mama māyā duratyayā". "duratyayā" means that, it is very difficult to
overcome. Almost impossible. Why? Because actually, Krishna is, you know, you
know, determined to ensure that only those who use their free will properly can
get through. And that, His, you know, that is His, ensured. Implemented.
Actualised by Maya Devi. So, you know, once a devotee asked Srila Prabhupada
that, Prabhupada, if our purpose is to serve Krishna, then why is "māyā" so
strong? And Prabhupada almost immediately replied. You know. It, because your
purpose is not strong. What does it mean? You know. If our purpose is to serve
Krishna, you know, then why is "māyā" so strong? Your purpose is not strong.
Actually, all the temptations trouble us as long as we are not determined to
serve Krishna. Once we become determined to serve Krishna, then we do not get
overcome by, you know, temptation so much. The temptations come. But we can put
them aside. Because we understand that I am going to be fixed in my purpose of
serving Krishna. Actually, this principle of a strong purpose helping a person
to overcome temptations is seen everywhere. You know. When a student is serious
about studies. And wants to crack a particular exam. Say, the purpose is very
strong. I am going to study. And I am going to succeed in this exam. Then, even
if there is some favorite sports match. Some, you know, popular TV show. Some,
you know, some super hit movie. Which is there. Now, all these temptations are
there. They could be potential distractions. But these distractions will
distract the students whose purpose is not strong. But those students whose
purpose is fixed, one-pointed, they will not be deluded. They will not become
distracted. So:

        mām eva ye prapadyante

What does it mean to make our purpose strong? It means to take shelter of
Krishna. To surrender to Krishna.

        māyām etāṁ taranti te

So, those people will cross over "māyā". "māyām etāṁ taranti te". They will go
beyond "māyā". How will they go beyond "māyā"? By wholehearted surrender to
Krishna. So, you know, if a person, you know, goes to visit somebody's house.
And that person has got a ferocious dog as a guard. And may be some German
Shepherd or overland, giant dog. It is said. And that dog starts growling. As
soon as, it see..., sees. The dog tr..., Dog is saying, this person passes. And
the dog starts charging towards this person. It starts charging. Now, we may
think, what can I do? Now, if I decide I will try to fight with the dog, it is
impossible. That dog is trained to bite and, you know, beat, practically, to
bi..., bite, trespasses and drive them away. So, what can a person do now? If
this visitor, if I am the visitor. And I say I know the owner. And I call the
owner. And the owner comes out. And so, oh, this is my friend. He says, they
say, the dog's name is Tommy. Tommy, stop. Stop. And then, Tommy stops again.
So, now, my telling the dog to stop is not going to work. But the owner, just
one word, that same dog was bristling, and growling, and about to pounce on me.
You know. That dog suddenly stops. And becomes calm. How? That magical
transformation happens when the dog gets the order of its master. Same way, when
we turn towards Krishna, when we surrender to Krishna, at that time, we become
free from "māyā". How do we become free from "māyā"? Because, you know,
surrender to Krishna is the choice that Kri..., m..., that "māyā" also wants us
to make. Ultimately. Just like, you know, when we make a, a right choice in the
multiple choice paper, then that question goes off. We get to the next question
after that. So, like that, the whole purpose of, you know, ou..., our purpose of
the temptations and tribulations, that are present in "māyā". You know.
Temptations means the idea that, I, let me do this. Let me do this. And then, I
will enjoy. Temptations, promises of plea..., you know, promises of pleasure.
And tribulations means threats of pain. You know. You know. Hmm. So, all these
promises of pleasure and threats of pain that are there, they are all removed
for a person who surrenders to Krishna. Because Krishna tells the material
energy to withdraw. Hold back. Stop. There is no more the, need to test this
devotee.

        māyām etāṁ taranti te

By "māyā"'s arrangemen..., by the, by Krishna's arrangement, that person can
"taranti te", go beyond "māyā". Hmm. So, Krishna tell, i..., Kri..., that means
this verse has two parts. First part is telling how "māyā" deludes. That:

        daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī
        mama māyā duratyayā

So, the two describers for "māyā" are "daivī" and "duratyayā". So, you know, you
know, "daivī" is divine. And "duratyayā" is formidable. Insurmountable. Very
difficult to some. So, th..., these describers indicate the power of "māyā". And
then, the second part that the C and D of this verse, they introduce us to a
power great than "māyā". And that is a power of Krishna. And how do we access
that power of Krishna? By surrender. So, you know, when we surrender to Krishna,
"māyām etāṁ taranti te", we go beyond "māyā". That is the process. And when we
follow this process, we all make spiritual advancement rapidly. So, you know,
you know, now, we may wonder, what exactly is surrender? How do we surrender? We
will discuss about surrender more in a, in the 18th Chapter. When we will talk
about:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

But here, suffice it to say that surrender is not passive. Surrender is active.
You know. It, th..., the, Bhaktiv..., Bhaktivinoda Thakur talks based on the scriptures
about six elements of surrender.

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam
        rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso
        goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā
        ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye
        ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

So, he says that, you know, actually, "ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ" and "prātikūlyasya
varjanam". Accepting that which is favorable. And rejecting that which is
unfavorable. That is surrender. Accepting that which is favorable. And rejecting
that which is unfavorable. So, you know, what does this involve? It involves,
you know, choice. Constant, you know, conscientious choice. So, that means, how
GI surrender to Krishna. Surrender is not, does not mean, you know, we have the
quite essential example of surrender, Draupadi surrendering to Krishna. Krishna.
Help. She raising her hearts and hands in surrender. Yes, that is one way of
surrendering. But that is not just the only way of surrendering. Even when
Arjuna is fighting on the battlefield with his full intelligence. Full
determination. Shooting the arrows. That is also surrender. You know. It is not
that just Draupadi is raising her hands is surrender. Arjuna shooting arrows
intelligently. And fiercely. Ferociously. That is also surrender. How is that?
Because surrender essentially means choosing the actions that take us towards
Krishna. And rejecting the actions that take us away from Krishna. So, you know,
you know, a, for Draupadi in that particular situation, when she was being
dishonored, you know, she could do. She tried her best. You know. She tried to
hold unto her saari. And she tried to defend her honor. But when that did not
work, then what did she do? She surrendered to Krishna. So, that is important.
Now, we see that, Arjuna also surrenders to Krishna at the start of the Bhagavad
Gita. When He says that:

        prichami tvam dharma samudha cetaha

I ask you what I should do. So, he is not necessarily raising up his hands to
surrender. But he is folding his hands. And asking Krishna for knowledge. But
then, when Arjuna starts shooting arrows. He is acting on Krishna's
instructions. And that actin..., acting out of Krishna's ins..., instructions is
also surrender. So, to understand about surrender, you know, let us look at, a,
a, from the broad perspective. You know. What is the basic principle of
spiritual life? The basic principle of spiritual life's is harmonising our will
with the divine will. With Krishna's will. So, that harmonisation can be
some..., sometimes be through activity. And sometimes through outer inactivity.
But either surren..., inner, you know, deference to Krishna's will. Inner, you
know, surrender to Krishna's will. So, that will vary how it will be ecti..., 
externally expressed. So, essentially, surrender means, ho..., you know, giving
up our will for exce..., accepting Krishna's will. Now, how we will accept
Krishna's will, will vary from time, place to cir...., time, place, and
circumstance. So, that, we, you cannot know in advance. Therefore, what is
important is, we always be thinking. What is anikul? What is pratikul? So, that
means, you know, when we do our sadhana diligently. Through our sadhana, also,
we are surrendering to Krishna. That means when we do our, you know, seva
diligently. Through that, also, we are surrendering to Krishna. So, when we know
that certain situations are tempta..., tempta..., c..., going to tempt us.
Moving away from those situations, that is also surrender to Krishna. When we
feel our senses getting agitated. And we reject that agitation. Which crush that
agitation with determination, that is also surrender to Krishna. Surrender
can come in many forms. Essentially, for us, what we should focus on is:

        ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ
        prātikūlyasya varjanam

Whatever is favorable, accept. What is unfavorable, reject. So, you know, much
of the, you know, what comprises surrender will be within the mind. You know.
Within the mind, if we entertain thoughts that take us away from Krishna. If we
fuel desires that take us away from Krishna. Then, we are not surrendering. We
are actually rebelling against Krishna. We may not have any direct intention to
rebel against Krishna. But essentially, the result will be that, we will be
rebelling against Krishna. On the other hand, when we turn towards Krishna and
surrender. That means we choose the thoughts and the desires that will take us
closer to Krishna. So, then, m..., Prabhupada's gro..., Prabhupada quotes
several verses. You know. Ta..., you know, Prabhupada's quo..., this is one of
his favorite quotes from "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad". He quotes it repeatedly. "tam
evaviditvā 'timrtyumeti". So, one will go beyond birth and death. From the
"Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad", he is quoting.

"Freedom is possible only by"

"tam eva viditvā". Knowing that Absolute Truth. So, you know, now, a, the
question may come up that, yes, why don't, you know, if su..., by surrender to
Krishna, one can become liberated, then why doesn't everyone surrender to
Krishna? So:

        na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ
        prapadyante narādhamāḥ
        māyayāpahṛta-jñānā
        āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

So, "na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ". Actually, those who are "mūḍhāḥ"s. Those who are
foolish, you know, you know, they do not surrender unto Me. "duṣkṛtino". So,
Krishna is talking here about four kinds of people who do not surrender to Him.
So, the previous verse, Krishna has said that by surrender to Him, you know,
people can get free from illusion. Then, the question comes up. You know. If it
is possible to become from illusion, by surrender to Krishna. Then, why don't
people accept that, you know, path of surrender? And thereby, become free from
illusion? Become free from difficulty? You know. You know. Now, that is because,
Krishna says that, you know, they, they are "duṣkṛtinaḥ". So, "kṛtinaḥ", "kṛti"
means activity. In fact, it re..., mea..., it means, you know, a, meritorious
activity. "kṛti". And "duṣkṛtinaḥ" means a not meritorious activity. But
notorious activity. So, activity that involves, a, some level of talent. Some
level of intelligence. But they are activities which is in a, the wrong
direction. So, that which is not meritorious. But which is not too notorious.
"duṣkṛtinaḥ". 27:33
