Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3mquKlNMGH8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=3mquKlNMGH8&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_097_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_09_Text_01_to_02_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=pGQNvF8ClFdj67z3BUKe5sdLgdN8MTU0ODQ4ODY5N0AxNTQ4NDAyMjk3

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita course. We are now coming to the
heart of the bhakti section. As we know, in the eighteen chapters of the Bhagavad
Gita, the first six chapters talk about the progression from karma to bhakti.
And the last six chapters talk about the progression from jnana to bhakti. The
central six chapters focus on bhakti itself. From the Seventh and Eigh..., Seventh
Chapter, Krishna introduced bhakti, you know, with "mayy āsakta-manāḥ" in 7.1.
"mām eva ye prapadyante" in 7.14. And then, "sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ". Knowing
Him as the Absolute Truth. In 7.30. In Eighth Chapter, there was a comparison of
bhakti-yoga and ashtanga-yoga. And "tasyāhaṁ su-labhaḥ pārtha". 8.14 said that
bhakti, you know, is easy. By ea..., by bhakti, I am easily attained. And it
concluded that by practice of yoga, one can attain everything that is attained
by all the other paths. And one can also attain the supreme destination. You
know. That is the conclusion. 8.28. You know.

        vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu caiva
        dāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam
        atyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvā
        yogī paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam

So, "yogī paraṁ sthānam". The "yogī" will attain the "paraṁ sthānam". Supreme
destination. So, "idaṁ viditvā". By knowing this. So, Krishna is not prodded by
Arjuna here with any questions. At the start of Chapter Nine. But Krishna, out
of the ecstasy of His heart, He has glorified the process of, you know, you know,
this process that gives the supreme result. And He wants to elaborate that
process further. And that is how He starts with the Ninth Chapter. The Ninth
Chapter is called as "The Most Conﬁdential Knowledge". This, you know, word,
most, mo..., most confidential comes from 9.2. "rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ".
"rāja-guhyaṁ" is, you know, you know, "guhyaṁ" is confidential. "rāja-guhyaṁ" is
the king among confidential knowledge. So, Prabhupada translate that as the
"The Most Conﬁdential Knowledge". Generally, it is called "rāja-guhyaṁ" yoga,
also. So, now, let us look at the overview of the Ninth Chapter. And then, we
will start with the verses. So, Chapter Nine is, verses one to three is,
devel..., developing kevala bhakti by knowledge about Krishna. Hmm, then, four
to ten is Krishna's inconceivable relationship with the material world. Then, do
not look at the subsections right now. Right now, let us focus on the main
sections to und..., understand the overall flow. Eleven to Nine, in, Eleven to
Nineteen talks about those who understand Krishna in various ways. So, among
them, those who understand devotionally is the best. So, here, the goal is to
develop kevala bhakti. And we start by, you know, know..., all, understanding
about Krishna. So, Prabhupada writes in his book, "On the Way to Kṛṣṇa" that all
knowledge comes from Krishna. But all kn...., knowledge does not begin from
Krishna. What does that mean? All knowledge comes from Krishna means:

        mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca

Whatever understanding we get, ultimately, it is coming from Krishna. But at the
same time, all knowledge does not begin from Krishna. It is not that, suddenly,
we start thinking about Krishna, one day. You know. Normally, we observe the
world around us. And trying to und..., make sense of the world. And then, try to
find out where did this world come from. And that is how we move forward. So,
knowledge in that sense does not, you know, come from Kri..., you know, it does
not, you know, begin with Krishna. Our appreciation for Krishna, you know, often
begins, when we observe the material world. See its magnificence. See its
mystery. See its, you know, mightiness. And then, we think, where does it come
from? Then, from that, we develop a, appreciation for the magnificence. The
might. And the mystery of the creator of the world. Of the source of the world.
So, first section in this chapter is chapter, what is the most confidential
knowledge? We will see. It is not just the knowledge of the glory of Krishna.
But it is also the knowledge of the glory of the path of love for Krishna. The
glory of the path of bhakti-yoga. So, four to ten talks about Krishna's
relationship with the material world. So, this chapter will first help us
establish, I he..., I help, unders..., understand the position of Krishna. And
then, after that, it will talk about the position of that process which concurs
even Krishna. You know. We understand the supremacy of Krishna. And then, after
that, we understand the process that concurs Krishna. My God. What a process it
must be. So, then, we, app..., our appreciation for that process increases much
more. So, four to ten will start with establishing Krishna's position. By
looking at His relationship with this world. Now, because Krishna's relationship
with this world is complex, it is inconceivable. So, not all people understand
it properly. So, there are different people who understand it in different ways.
That is the second section. And is, Eleven to Nineteen, those who understand
Krishna's position in different ways. And then, in that, there are these three
categories. Impersonalists mistake Krishna's body to be material. And thirteen,
fourteen, the kevala bhaktas devotee themselves utterly to the Supreme Lord. And
in fifteenth verse, there are described two, three types of people,
"ahangrahopasana", "pratikopasana", and "vishvarupa-upasana". "ahangrahopasana"
is I am myself, I am the Brahman. "pratikopasana" is, you know, the worship of
the devatas as representatives of the Absolute Truth. As representations of the
Absolute Truth. "vishvarupa-upasana" is worshiping the "vishvarupa". We will
discuss these three in more, in category detail. And then, in sixteen to
nineteen, Krishna talks about "vishvarupa-upasana" a little bit more. Then,
Krishna, in twenty to twenty-eight, you know, you know, you know, establishes
how kevala bhakti is superior to demigod worship. The demigod worship here
connects with "pratikopasana." So, Krishna says that, you know, there are the,
all these people are also approaching Him. But those who worship Him purely are,
you know, b..., you know, a, focused on pure devotional service, they are far
better. And then, you know, then, Krishna talks further about the glory of
kevala bhakti by saying, kevala bhakti, ke..., elevates even the most fallen. So,
here, the verses "api cet su-durācāro" and "māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya". All
these verses come up. The point here is, the whole chapter culminates with the
glory of Krishna. And the glory of the path of devotion to Krishna. So, you
know, you know, the most confidential knowledge is that Krishna is the God of
love. And He is conquered by those who love Him. So, it is this that is revealed
in this chapter in a very sweet way. Let us look at this chapter now. You know.
It, from the start. So, we have verse one.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ
        pravakṣyāmy anasūyave
        jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ
        yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt

So, "idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ". "idaṁ tu te". Oh, Arjuna. This, I will speak to
you. "guhya-tamaṁ". "guhya" is confidential. "guhya-tamaṁ" is most confidential
knowledge. Hmm. You know. So, actually, the word, the chater..., chapter, ti...,
chapter title comes from both 9.1 as well as 9.2. 9.1 as well as 9.2.
"rāja-guhyaṁ" and "guhya-tamaṁ". As we have discussed earlier, "guhya" refers
to, you know, you know, confidential. "guhya-taraṁ" will refer to more
confidential. And "guhya-tamaṁ" will refer to the most confidential. So, Krishna
will use this superlative describer, "guhya-tamaṁ", several times in the
Bhagavad Gita. And each context, we will see that it is used in the context of
bhakti yo..., alone. Wherever it is used, Krishna does not, some impersonalists
try to use, argue that actually, you know, "guhya-tamaṁ". Hmm. That actually
higher than the knowledge of Krishna is the, higher than knowledge of the
personal Absolute Truth is the knowledge of the impersonal Absolute. But we will
see repeatedly that Krishna uses the word "guhya-tamaṁ" again and again to refer
to Bhag..., you know, to the personal Absolute. And the process of devotion to
the personal Absolute. So, the most confidential knowledge is not that there is
something unborn within Krishna. Which is to be worshiped. No. It is Krishna who
is to be worshiped. And that is the most confidential knowledge. So,
"pravakṣyāmy anasūyave". Oh, Arjuna. You are non-envious. So, I will speak to
you. You know. You know. So, generally, you know, you know, why does Krishna say
that you are "anasūyave"? You know. You know. "pravakṣyā...", a..., what is the
relationship between the two? The, Krishna speaking. And His, a..., and the
"anasūyave" point, you know, Krishna has used some, sim..., thing similar in the
Fourth Chapter, also. When Krishna told Arjuna that I will speak this knowledge
to you.

        sa evāyaṁ mayā te ’dya
        yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ
        bhakto ’si me sakhā ceti
        rahasyaṁ hy etad uttamam

Krishna has told Arjuna that I will speak that knowledge which I had given to
"Vivasvān" long ago. That He has mentioned in 4.1. 4.2, He says how it was lost.
And 4.3, He says that now, I will give it back to you. Give it once again to
you. Because you are "bhakto ’si me sakhā ceti". So, you know, you know,
devotion and envy are opposite emotions. You know. Devotion means we rejoice in
Krishna's glory. Envy means we burn because of Krishna's glory. You know. Why do
we burn? Because we feel that, you know, I want to be glorious. I want to be
famous. I want to be great. Why is Krishna so great? I want to be great. So,
there is, these two are opposites. Devo..., in being, devotion, you know, we,
the more we understand Krishna's glories, the more our heart floods with joy.
So, you know, when we are in competition with Krishna instead of being in
devotion, then the more we hear Krishna's glories, the more we feel, you know, I
want to be like that. Why is He, why is He enjoying so much? So, actually,
Krish..., you know, there is alway..., already, the "anasūy". You know. The
"sūya". The envy is there in the heart. And if we hear Krishna's glories more.
Then, Krishna, then, our envy for Krishna will increase all the more. That is
why Krishna, does not, you know, reveal His glories to the envious. Krishna does
not want to cause the envious to even, to become more offensive. To burn more.
And to create more spiritual misfortune for themselves. So, therefore, Krishna
does not reveal His glory to the envious. Krishna reveals His glory to those who
are devoted. Those who are devotionally pious. So, when Krishna reveals this
glory to them, then their attraction to Krishna increases. That animosity to
Krishna does not increase. Because they do have no animosity towards Krishna.
You know. So, it is, when Kri..., when it is said that Krishna reveals His
glory to those who are non-envious. It is not that Krishna wants to hide His
glory from anyone. Nor is it that Krishna wants to keep the spiritual knowledge,
which He is giving, confidential deliberately. Actually, the confidentiality of
the knowledge is simply a m..., means, b..., b..., to protect those who are
envious of Him from creating further misery for themselves. So, "anasūyave". So,
I will speak this to you. Oh, Arjuna. Because you are non-envious. Then, "jñānaṁ
vijñāna-sahitaṁ". That how am I giving this knowledge to you? Knowledge and
realisation. "jñānaṁ" and "vijñāna". So, Krishna has used this word, "jñānaṁ".
"vijñāna". This compound twice in the Bhagavad Gita till now. He has used it
once in 6.8.

        jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā
        kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ
        yukta ity ucyate yogī
        sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ

There, He has said that, one who has aquired knowledge and realisation, that
person becomes "tṛptātmā". That person becomes satisfied. And similarly, Krishna
has used "jñāna-vijñāna" again in the, you know, Seventh Chapter. When He is
describing the glory of the knowledge that He is giving. There, He says in, you
know, you know, you know, there, also, He says in 7.2 that, you know, you know,
you know, you know, you know:

        jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ
        yaj jñā ...

No. You know.

        yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj
        jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

So, He says that, there, the context of "jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ" is:

        jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam
        idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ
        yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj
        jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

So, there, the word "jñāna" and "vijñāna" do not come together, th..., as
neighbourhood words. But they are there. "jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam". So, you
know, you know, Krishna says that I will give this knowledge to you. And what
will happen by this knowledge? The, He says, b..., actually, this is the
complete knowledge. Once, you have this, there will be nothing more to be got.
In fact, you know, this word "jñānaṁ" and "sa-vijñānam". So, Prabhupada wanted
his devotees. His disciples and followers. Who were, you know, scienti..., who
were scientifically trained, to present Krishna Consciousness scientifically to
the world. And for that purpose, he wanted them, you know, to start a
magazine. A scientific magazine. And he had suggested a name at that time called
"sa-vijñānam". So, the devotees from the Bhaktivedanta Institute, you know, have
been trying to run that magazine. By "sa-vijñānam". So, they said, Prabhupada,
could we call "vijñānam"? He said, no. "sa-vijñānam". Prabhupada said.
"vijñānam" simply scien..., you know, the word "vijñānam" is today used in terms
of science. But the Bhagavad Gita uses the word "sa-vijñānam" to indicate that,
actually, this is knowledge with realisation. It is scient..., it is
"sa-vijñānam". So, "jñāna" refers to theoretical knowledge. But it is not just
theoretical knowledge. What the process of bhakti-yoga offers is, theore.., not
just theoretical knowledge of Krishna's glories. But experiential,
transformational, you know, realisation of the sweetness of His glories.
"’haṁ sa-vijñānam". So, here, also, Krishna, "jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ". You know.
Now, here, Krishna is saying, what will happen when "jñāna" and "vijñāna"? I am
giving you this knowledge. I..., "jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ". Most confidential
knowledge is, it is, it is with knowledge and realisation. What will happen by
that? "yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt". "mokṣyase ’śubhāt". You know. By this
knowledge, you will become free from all, yah, misery. You know. "aśubhāt".
"aśubhāt" means, you know, not exactly misery. But inauspicious.
Inauspiciousness indicates that it will, wha..., misery, in the future, it will
come. When we do the inauspicious activities, that will bring misery in the
future. So, "mokṣyase ’śubhāt". That means you will not do any activities which
will lead to misery in the future. So, Krishna does not necessarily say that you
will become free from all misery now. See, in this world, we cannot become free
from misery, entirely, immediately. It is like when we are sick, we all ha...,
have to undergo suffering because of the sickness. But, you know, you know, if
we are taking the treatment, then gradually, as we keep taking the treatment, we
will become free from sickness. We will become si..., free from disease. And
then, we will become free from misery. So, if at the time of sickness, we do
activities which aggravate the sickness, then the misery will increase. But, if
at that time, we take the proper medicine. Then, what will happen is, the
disease, we will not be, you know, disease will gradually be cured, we will not
be doing anything which is going to increase our misery. So, in that sense:

        yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt

"mokṣyase ’śubhāt". You will become free from, you know, inauspicious activities
which lead to misery. Which lead to misery. So, "mokṣyase ’śubhāt". You know.
Now, we may wonder how can Krishna give "jñāna" and "vijñāna"? Normally,
knowledge is what we can get. And then, realisation is, knowledge is what
somebody else can give. But realisation is something we have to get. So, how can
it be said that Krishna will give knowledge and realisation, both? Actually,
ultimately, realisation is something which we only have to get. But Krishna can
give us the process by which we can gain realisation. So, when the process is
given, then that process helps us to, you know, apply it. See, "jñāna" is like
the diagnosis. And "vijñāna" is like the prescription. We need, when we go to a
doctor, you know, doctor, I am having pain in the stomach. And then, the doctor
gives an elaborate 45-minute talk about the different kinds of problems that can
be there in the stomach which cause pain. And then, gives us a diag...,
explanation of what is the specific problem that in our, you know, stomach,
also. He says, now, you can go. Your time is over. You know. What? You know. I
do not want to just know what is wrong. I want to know how it can be set right.
You know. He says, the, a diagnosis is not of much use without the prescription.
So, when Krishna says, "jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ" means that He gives diagnosis
and prescription. And when the patient takes the prescription. Then, by that,
the patient will get cured. So, you know, it, "yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt". We
will become free from misery. "mokṣyase ’śubhāt". And when we become free from
misery, we will become supremely by that. So, that will come gradually. Now, let
us look at Srila Prabhupada's brie..., purport briefly. So, so, Prabhupada
explains over here. That, now, I will speak the glories. Prabhupada starts by
talking about hearing. Krishna is speaking. So, the glories of hearing, he
mentions first in his purport. And then, Prabhupada gives the summary of what
has been cloing... on, going on in the Bhagavad Gita. And then, "idaṁ jñānam".
So, now:

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ
        pravakṣyāmy anasūyave
        jñānaṁ ...

So, "idaṁ" is in the first line. "jñānaṁ" is in third line. "idaṁ jñānam". So,
Prabhupada is explaining to us what is this "idaṁ jñānam". Krishna has used a
similar word in the, you know, previous chapter's last verse. "idaṁ viditvā".
"idaṁ". After knowing this.

        vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu caiva
        dāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam
        atyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvā

That once you understand this, oh, Arjuna, then, you will get all the results of
"jñāna", "tapaḥ", "jñā...". Everything. And not only that. You will get
something more, also. You know. "paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam". You will get the
"paraṁ sthānam", also. So, Krishna is saying that you will get all this just by
the practice of, by understanding this knowledge. Of course, the understanding
includes realisation. So, as the chapter's flow, Pra..., flow will describe,
increase. Will develop. We will see that Krishna is actually referring to
bhakti-yoga itself. So, Prabhupada explains that right away in the purport. He
says that "idaṁ jñānam" refers to the knowledge of pure devotional service. And
he lists the nine elements.

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ ...

You know. And then, Prabhupada talks about, you know, so, spiritual realisation.
So, "jñānam" is simply to understand the living entity is not material is not
sufficient. So, that is just "jñānam". But "vijñāna", he says:

"That may be the beginning of spiritual realization, but one should recognize
the difference between activities of the body and the spiritual activities of
one who understands that he is not the body."

What is the difference between the two? And then, Prabhupada explains
"anasūyave". Now, you know, you know, going back to the overview, now, this
chapter is actually very similar to the Seventh Chapter. You know. Seventh
Chapter actually also has similar sections. 7.1 to 3 is talking about the glory
of the knowledge that Arjuna is being given. "mayy", it starts from "mayy
āsakta-manāḥ". First verse ends with "tac chṛṇu", hear about it. Then, it is
"jñānaṁ t...", you know, it talks about, the con..., so, first talks about, the,
this knowledge will help you to become attached to Me. Second talks about, this
knowledge is completely. And then, you know, you know, actually, this, "yaj
jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj". We should have nothing more to do. And third know...,
third verse says that this knowledge is very rare. "mayy ā...", you know,
"manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu". That is the first three. So, similar to, the first three
verses over here. Then, the second section talks about Krishna's relationship
with the material world. That is for verses four to thir..., you know, twelve,
thirteen, to twelve. It talks about, you know, how material and spiritual
energies of Krishna is there. And then, talks about how Krishna pervades
material existence. And then, it talks about how, you know, you know, Krishna is
beyond the three modes. The master of the three modes. Then, after that, is
Krishna's, you know, how different people approach Krishna in different ways.
How different people understand Krishna. So, there, we discussed about,
thirteen, fourteen talks about how, if surrender to Krishna, one can become
liberated. Fifteen talks about those who do not surrender, you know,
"duṣkṛtinaḥ". And sixteen to eight..., nineteen talks about those who surrender
and become "jñānavān". Then, twenty to twenty-three talks about those who
worship the devatas. Twenty-four talks about who worshi..., those who worship
th..., d..., those who are attracted to the impersonal Brahman as the highest
reality. And then, twenty-five to thirty talks about how the knowledge of
Krishna liberates. So, you know, you know, the similar pattern is seen over
here. Here, also, one to three is the glory of the knowledge. Four to ten is
Krishna's relationship with this world. Then, eleven, you know, to le...,
nineteen is the relationship of, you know, how different people understand Him.
And then, the same thought flow is there. Si..., or similar thought flow is
there. But the whole con..., all the concepts are developed deeper. As we move
forward, we will see that. The concepts are developed deeper. And then,
twenty to twenty th..., you know, three talks about, the twenty to twenty-eight,
actually, talks about comparing demigod worship and pure devotional service. And
then, again, the p..., there, it was primarily focusing on knowledge of Krishna.
Now, here, it is kevala bhakti. Devotion to Krishna. And how that liberates,
even the most fallen. So, there is the, there is, remarkable similarity is in
these two chapters. Let us move forward to the next verse now. So:

        rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ
        pavitram idam uttamam
        pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ
        su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam

Now, so, "rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ". So, this is the king of knowledge. And it is
the most confidential knowledge. And it is supremely pure. "pavitram idam
uttamam". "uttamam" means which is beyond the darkness of this world.
"pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ". It gives us kn..., a realisation. And "su-sukhaṁ
kartum avyayam". That actually, it is "su-sukhaṁ kartum". It is joyfully
performed. Now, Srila Prabhupada's purport goes over each of these points very
systematically. So, here, also, Krishna is speaking about the glory of this
knowledge. So, say, there, also, Krishna spoke about the glory of this
knowledge. You know. In the 7.2, also. Nothing more to be known. So, you know,
we will see that we discussed earlier Chapters Three t..., and Five are similar.
In their overall thought flow. And conceptual division. And similarly, Chapters,
you know, Seven and Nine are similar in their thought flow and their conceptual
di..., con..., division. B..., b..., but in each of these case, we will see in
Fifth Chapter, Krishna goes deeper in the explanation of karma-yoga than what
was in Third Chapter. And here, in the Ninth Chapter, Krishna will go deeper in
the explanation of bhakti-yoga than what was in the Seventh Chapter. So,
"rāja-vidyā". The word "rāja-vidyā" refers to, it can refer to, t..., it can be
ca..., broken in two ways, the compound word. It can be the king of knowledge.
Or it can be the knowledge of kings. What does the, what the meaning? Knowledge
of kings means, Krishna has earlier told in 4.2:

        evaṁ paramparā-prāptam
        imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ

That this knowledge is to be acquired by the raja rsis. The great saintly kings.
So, ra..., the, it is the vidya, knowledge of the kings. Now, why of the kings?
Actually, this Bha..., is Bhagavad Gita meant only for the kings? You know. You
know. You know. Are all of us also kings? Or is Bhagavad Gita meant to make
people into kings? What is the meaning of saying that it is knowledge of the
kings? Actually, the idea is, the Bhagavad Gita does not talk about renouncing
the world. The Bhagavad Gita talks about living in the world. And acting in the
world. And pursuing liberation. Pursuing transcendence by acting in the world.
And acting in the world is the primary prerogative of the ksatriyas. The
brahmanas are a little bit more distant from the world. The brahmanas are
important. And Bhagavad Gita does respect the brahmanas. And it is said that the
brahmanas, you know, are persons who give this knowledge. We will see that in
the Eighteenth Chapter when Krishna talks about the characteristics of the
brahmans. But, you know, see, brahmanas can give knowledge. But the ksatriyas
implement the knowledge through their, you know, social policies. Cultural
policies. Economic policies. The knowledge is implemented. So, there is
knowledge that is given. And knowledge that is implemented. Both are important.
So, the, who does the implementation? It is primarily the ksatriyas. Ksatriyas
need to have knowledge. See, ksatriyas are anyway going to act. There are always
people who in this world, no matter how the social condition is. Whether it is
degraded. Or it is ex..., exalted. There are always going to be people of
ksatriya inclinations. That means people who are going to manage. Delegate.
Lead. Rule. So, now, if those people are not spiritually educated. Then, they
will el..., live and act according to their own ideas. And they will crea...,
and that will, you know, lead comp..., complications. That will lead to, you
know, troubles. Greater and greater. So, if they are spiritually guided. Then,
they will be able to act properly. And they will also be able to sh..., you
know, you know, k..., set up systems by which this knowledge can be shared with
others. So, the idea is not to limit or monopolise the knowledge with a
particular community. But the idea is to strategise, you know, so that the
knowledge is most effectively, you know, distributed. So, if the g..., if g...,
ksatriyas are the people who are going to influence the world. So, if they are
inspired by the knowledge of the Bhagavad Gita, then they will be able to give
the knowledge to everyone. So, "rāja-vidyā". So, it is the "vidyā" of the
"rāja"s. The knowledge of the kings. So, simila..., oth..., other ways, it is
also the, you know, king of all knowledge. You know. You know. You know. You
know. In the Tenth Chapter, Krishna will say, also, that:

        adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ

He says that among the different kinds of "vidyā", I am "adhyātma". "adhyātma"
means I am the spiritual knowledge. Because the spiritual knowledge is, you
know, the best of all knowledge. That gives the be..., it is most intimately
connected with us. And gives the best result to us. So, there are different
kinds of knowledge. But the most pow..., just as a king is the most powerful.
King can, you know, bring about the most transformation. So, among the different
kinds of knowledge that can bring about transformation, this is the knowledge
that can bring about the greatest transformation. Now, we can have, you know,
kno..., knowledge of nuclear physics. And with that knowledge of nuclear
physics, well, you know, probably whole soul, whole city can be destroyed. But,
you know, with all the mo..., power of the most powerful bombs that can be made
by nuclear physics. You know. The bad habit of even one per..., bad habits of
even one person cannot be destroyed. You know. Whatever inclinations that they
are there, no, they cannot be destroyed. Even if the, their physical body, they
are destroyed. Their mental inclinations will still be there. And in the next
life when they are born, all those mental inclinations will still continue. But
when we acquire exp..., spiritual knowledge, that has such transformational
potency. That that can era..., destroy, you know, without leaving even a trace.
It c..., it can eradicate and eliminate all the negative behavioral traits. All
the bad habits of people. This is "rāja-vidyā". The most powerful knowledge.
Prabhupada explains from another perpective that, actually, there are many
philosophers in the Vedic culture. So, you know:

"Among the principal philosophers in India are Gautama, Kaṇāda, Kapila,
Yājñavalkya, Śāṇḍilya and Vaiśvānara."

You know. So:

"And ﬁnally there is Vyāsadeva, the author of the Vedānta-sūtra."

So, Prabhupada is giving a, a rough listing of names over here. So, these are
the people who have given the various branches of knowledge. "Kapila" has given
yoga. Like that. You know. There are six systems of philosophy Prabhupada is
mentioning. And e..., roughly, not every, Krishna, you know, precisely. It is
not that each of them is necessarily the founder of, you know, the six systems.
Or the m..., or the most prominent systematizer. But Prabhupada is giving a
li.., listing of the most pro..., some of the pro..., prominent sages. And he is
saying there are many. But actually, you know, you know, there is such an
abundance of knowledge. There is so much wealth of knowledge. But what is the
most precious in that knowledge? That is, you know, this knowledge, this is
given. So, it is king of all knowledge. So, there are, actually, in Vedanta
sutra, what Vyasadeva does is, he basically responds and refutes, responds to,
and refutes all the systems of philosophy that are there. In the Vedic culture.
So, you know, Nyaya, Sankhya, Yoga, Vaisheshika, all these philosophies are
there. He refutes all of them. And he establishes Vedanta is the conclusion. So,
that is what is, you know, the, you know, a way, in which Vedanta is established
as the king of all knowledge. And that same Vedanta is explained over here in a
concise and accessible way by Krishna. So, in that sense, it is "rāja-vidyā".
And then, Prabhupada explains "rāja-guhyaṁ". Why "rāja-guhyaṁ"? Most
confidential knowledge. You know. It is the king among all confidential
knowledge. Because he says, first of all, most people are in the bodily concept
of life. They do not know anything about the soul at all. Because they do not
know anything about the soul, they live just like animals. Then, there are some
people who come to know about the soul. Those who come to know about the soul,
they may also be caught up in impersonal conception. But among the people, who
come to know about soul, there are some who come to know about the Supreme Soul,
also. And the bound of love that can bring eternal ecstasy to both of them. The
Lord is eternally ecstasy, ecstatic. But the more the souls He has in the
spiritual world, the more His ecstasy increases. So, and the soul has no ecstasy
when he is in the material world. Soul goes back to spiritual world. And then,
there is ecstasy. So, actually, this is the, you know, you know, way, Kri...,
you know, this s..., this know..., this, knowledge is going to produce the
Supreme ecstasy. And that is why it is called as s..., most confidential
knowledge. So, Prabhupada explains that in a "rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ". So, you
know, Second Chapter has talked about the soul. And then, slowly, after that,
the thought of the Bhagavad Gita has been developing about how one can act at
the level of the soul. How does one realise the soul? Not by "jñāna". By just,
by renouncing the world. And contemplating. I am the soul. I am the soul. Not
like that. Krishna says act in this world with detachment. And gradually, by
that, internal realisation will come. And when one acts in this way with 
detachment. And gains internal realisation. By this, gradually, one moves
forward. Till, eventually, one comes to the platform of understanding that, you
know, there is a Supreme Soul with whom I have to relate. And, you know, when
loving Him, there is supreme happiness.

So, basically, Second to Si..., you know, S..., from the Third to Sixth
Chapters, the focus has been on the atma. How to get atma jnana. To realise the
atma. And the, Krishna has not been the focus till then. But in the Seventh
Chapter onwards, Krishna is becoming the focus. In ashtanga-yoga, also. In the
Eighth Chapter, al..., also. Now, this has been, it is being described how
Krishna should be made the focus. And then, in the Ninth Chapter, now, Krishna
becomes the focus. And devotional path becomes the focus entirely. This is
"rāja-guhyaṁ". Most confidential knowledge. And then, you know, you know,
"pavitram idam uttamam". So, "pavitram idam uttamam". So, it is supremely
purifying. So, here, Prabhupada quotes from the "Padma Purāṇa". Let us look at
the verse here. We will discuss about this verse more in detail when we t...,
study Bhagavad, you know, "Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu". So, but I will just mention
it.

        aprārabdha-phalaṁ pāpaṁ
        kūṭaṁ bījaṁ phalonmukham
        krameṇaiva pralīyeta
        viṣṇu-bhakti-ratātmanām

So, "aprārabdha-phalaṁ pāpaṁ". "aprārabdha" means that which has not yet become
fructified. So, "kūṭaṁ", so, there are the, you know, when we talk about sinful
reactions. They can be in various stages. You know. The technicalities, we will
discuss later. But basically, every reaction that we do is sowing a seed. And
when the seed is sown, eventually, it will grow. And it grows into a, you know,
you know, sapling, small. And then, it grows into a tree. And then, it gives
fruits. So, when, now, this is a tree. Whose fruits we have to accept. You know.
We cannot avoid it. So, it is like, you know, you know, the law of karma. You
know, if you put it that way. What you sow, as we know, as you sow, so shall you
reap. That is what they said in the bible. So, this is also talking about same
metaphor itself. Every action that we do is like sowing a seed. Sowing a seed.
And it is going to produce reactions. We cannot avoid the reactions. So, it is
a, to give a cooking metaphor, if we say:

        jopakaya hev upacana parega

You know. Whatever you have cooked, you will have to eat it. We cannot avoid it.
So, of course, there is a process for bhakti-yoga. By which it is possible. But
generally, otherwise, whatever action we do the reactions has to come. So,
here, 36:16
