Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NiuhA3qZqeo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_109_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_38_to_Chapter_11_Text_04_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=NiuhA3qZqeo&event=video_description&redir_token=bfjGtnnU6agd0xEqQpu-NuBtpax8MTU0ODQ4OTIxM0AxNTQ4NDAyODEz

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the last part of the Tenth Chapter now. We completed till verse t..., 27. So,
let us have a look, quick overview of the Tenth Chapter before we move ahead.
This no one, no, Chapter is titled as "Vibhuti Yoga". So, first, Krishna says
how it is difficult to know Him in verses 1 to 7. Then, 8 to 12, He say..., 8 to
11, He states how He can be known through bhakti. You know. That is the Chatur
Shloki Gita. Then, 13 to 18, Arjuna acknowledges Krishna's glories. And then,
asks to know about them more. Especially about how He has pervaded material
existence. You know. So, then, 19 to 42 is the concept of "Vibhuti Yoga" that
is being described. So, how to know Krishna? Through His "Vibhuti"s. So, let us
look at 10.38. We had stopped at 37 earlier.

        daṇḍo damayatām asmi
        nītir asmi jigīṣatām
        maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ
        jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham

So, "daṇḍo damayatām asmi". That, you know, "damayatām" is to, you know,
suppress. To control. To bring on the right track. So, there are many ways of
bringing people on the right track. So, the most powerful among them, in the
sense that the strongest is "daṇḍaḥ". So, you know, it is good if we could,
con..., convince people by h..., good, g..., advise. And council. And warnings.
But sometimes, the, even that does not work. And the last resort often has to
be punishment. And that is why in all cultures, all over the world, there have
been some strong, you know, means of punishment. Maybe some jails. Or some other
how..., places for punishment. And reformation. So, "daṇḍo damayatām asmi".
That, "daṇḍaḥ". These people are given, "daṇḍaḥ". That "daṇḍaḥ" is the
strongest. It is the last restort for punishing people. And Krishna says, I am
"daṇḍaḥ". So, this does not mean that Krishna wants to give "daṇḍaḥ" to
everyone. That is not the point of this verse. Here, you know, the "Vibhuti" of
Krishna has been talked about. And that which is the most powerful. The most
attractive. The most influential. Among various manifestations is being
emphasised. So, "daṇḍaḥ" is a forceful way of making a point. When especially,
when the point is not made by any other way. "nītir asmi jigīṣatām". You know.
So, among the, the "jigīṣatām". "jigīṣatām" means those who seek victory. I am
morality. "nītir asmi jigīṣatām". So, now, you know, sometimes, it is said that
in war and love, everything is fair. You know. So, there is a common western
saying in the western literature. And the idea is that, you know, actually, what
we want, once we gain, want victory. Whatever it takes, we will do to get
victory. Now, that attitude might be there. But Krishna does not recommend that
attitude. He says, yes, we want victory. But we want, but you should seek
victory by virtuous means. That is the best. And now, you know, you know, there
are, you know, it is, it is said to be there are three kinds of "nītiḥ". There
is, you know, "Brihaspati nītiḥ". There is "Shukra nītiḥ". And there is, you
know, you know, "Kanika nītiḥ". So what are these? "Brihaspati", as we know,
is the, the counsellor, the minister, priest of the devatas. So, "Brihaspati"
"nītiḥ" is choose good means. And choose good ends. So, strive for good ends by
good means. That is "Brihaspati nītiḥ". Then, there is "Shukra nītiḥ". "Shukra
nītiḥ" is that, as long as the ends are good. Then, the means do not matter. One
can use bad means, also, for good ends. And "Kanika nītiḥ" is, do not care about
ends. Do not care about goods. About means. Just try for your own, you know, own
protection. And pleasure. And power. That is all. So, "Kanika" was a brahmana
friend of "Shakuni". And when "Shakuni" was using his devious tactics against
the Pandavas, so, at that time, "Dhṛtarāṣṭra", you know, was feeling some
pangs of conscious. He says, it is not proper. We should not be doing like this.
So, at that time, you know, you know, "Shakuni" brought "Kanika". And "Kanika"
gave some advice. He says, you know, do not worry about all these things.
Ultimately, you know, our survival, our prosperity is what is all-important. And
for that purpose, whatever is required can be taken. Now, among these three, the
"Kanika" is, you know, you know, that, that, it means, one, even the ends are
good. Neither the ends are good. Nor the means are good. But just one con...,
considers only one's self-interest. That is all. So, that is a very bad thing.
And that should be definitely avoided. Preferable always is "Brihaspati nītiḥ".
That seek good means, good ends by good means. And that is what Krishna tries to
do in the Mahabharata, also. First of all, He tries His best to avoid war. You
know. And He is ready to even accept five kingdom. Five villages. That is all
that is required. You know. He says, if that is all that you give me, that is
way, you can avoid the war. But then, Kauravas refuse that. And then, the
Kauravas start using devious tricks even in the war field. Then, Krishna also
uses, to use those f..., devious tricks. And therefore, He goes. And He goes.
And checks. You know. He uses sometimes. So, that is why some of the principle
warriors on the Kaurava side, they are killed by what seems to be a devious
means. So, that is actually the point of the, you know, B..., "Shukra nītiḥ".
So, "Shukra nītiḥ" is used because the "Shukra nītiḥ" is required at times. So,
you know, the meanings are, the end, the ends are good. So, the "Yudhiṣṭhira
Mahārāja" is Dharmaraj. And for the sake of, you know, Dharmaraj, for the sake
of bringing dharma, his victory is important. So, how that victory is to be
achieved, that may vary according to time, place, circumstance. And that is
what is talked about over here. So, you know, that is what is showing in the
Mahabharata. Sometimes, you know, some seemingly unethical means may have to be
used. If the ends are ethical. Now, this is, of course, exceptional. This is not
the standard. And especially, "satho sathyam". When the enemy is doing that,
then one may have no alternative. One may have to do that. But in general, that
is not what is recommended. So, you know, here, the focus is on, you know, the
best way would be that if we want victory, strive for victory. But by ethical
means. That means the "Brihaspati nītiḥ" is the best. And Krishna says that
those who achieve victory by virtuous means, they are the most, you know, that
they, their power represents Me. Their power is My Vibhuti. Then, after that:

        maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ

So, "maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ". So, "guhyā". "guhyā" means secret. So, those who
want to maintain secrets, the best way to maintain the secret is to keep silent.
You know. Many people think, you know, see, I know a secret. And I will tell
only to you. Do not tell anyone. Okay? So, when we speak like that. You know.
Many times, when people come to know a secret, their, their pleasure comes not
from knowing the secret. But from telling other that I know the secret. And
then, what happens? You know. Then, it becomes a, you know, parampara of people
who tell, do not tell this to anyone. You know. And then, what happens? They
say, this is, secret become public news. So, if you want to maintain the secret,
then "maunam caivasmi guhyanam". "maunam". Be confidential. Be con..., do not
speak only. That is the best way to maintain secrets. And then, "jñanam
jñanavatam aham". So, among the knowledge people, knowledge is the most
important virtue. So, "jñanam jñanavatam aham", you know, now, of the wise, I, I
am wisdom. So, what distinguishes the wise people is their wisdom. If a person
who is known to be very wise. And suddenly starts speaking foolishly. Then, that
person will not have so much value. So, that wisdom, that "jña...", that
attracts people to, you know, the wise. That wisdom is an opulence of Krishna.
And, you know, after describing this, Krishna moves forward. And then, He starts
giving the conclusion of the whole section. So, the last four verses are, you
know, summary sort of verses.

        yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ
        bījaṁ tad aham arjuna
        na tad asti vinā yat syān
        mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram

So, "yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ". That, for all living beings, I am the "bījam".
"bījaṁ tad aham arjuna". I am the seed for all living beings. And "na tad asti
vinā yat syān". That without "mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram". Without Me, actually,
nothing can exist. So, we have discussed earlier how Krishna is the source of
everything. Krishna is the sustainer of everything. That has been discussed in
Seven Chapter. Nine Chapter again. You know. And now, Krishna is, you know,
reiterating that. So, actually speaking, you know, you know, yes, Krishna has
identified Himself with some opulences in this world. And right in the beginning
only, He has said that, I am going to you, speak "prādhānyataḥ". Only a few of
the opulences. Now, when Krishna says that, you know, you know, say, among the
equa..., among the fish, I am the shark. Now, does, that means, does that mean
only the shark come from Krishna? And others do not come from Krishna? You know.
No. Or is that Krishna car..., has some special affection for shark? And no
affection for anyone else? No. Nothing like that. What it simply means is, that,
that, that particular fish attracts attention. Because of its speed. Its power.
Its ferocity. So, you know, you know, that attention which is there. Which is
attracting people. Which is attracting peo..., you know, which is, you know,
that, that power, that opulence is a manifestation of Krishna. So, let us once
start identify, restricting Krishna to specific manifestations alone. And not
seeing His connection with everything. Krishna clarifies in this verse. Saying
that, actually, everything is sustained by Me. Now, existence of, nothing is
possible without Me. Not only am I the source of everything. But I am also
the sustainer of everything. So, you know, you know, after that, Krishna will
now, you know, you know, say that ok, everything comes from Me. But within that,
there are certain specific things which are My mani..., which are My Vibhutis.
But even the Vibhutis are endless. That is what He will state in this verse.

        nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ
        vibhūtīnāṁ paran-tapa
        eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto
        vibhūter vistaro mayā

"nanto ’sti". That there is no end. End to what? "mama divyanam". My divine
opulences. "vibhutinam paran-tapa". That My divine opulences, there is no end to
them. "eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto". That, of that, you know, "uddeśataḥ". "uddeśataḥ"
means as an example, I have spoken a few things. "vibhūter vistaro mayā".
"vibhūter vistaro mayā". My Vibhuti is the star. Expanded immensely. The Vibhuti
is very, very vast. And I have spoken a, just a few samples of it. So, what
Krishna has state..., started in this chapter, He is repeating now. And not in
the start of the Chapter. In the start of this section. "prādhānyataḥ
kuru-śreṣṭha". So, similarly, "uddeśataḥ". "tūddeśataḥ prokto". So, you know,
whatever, Arjuna, I have spoken to you, this is a sample. So, Krishna gives a
sample to help us to understand the broad principle. So, now, in this world,
also, you know, we will find certain things. Which attract us. So, according to
our culture, according to our time, place, circumstance. When certain things are
attractive, we hum..., we need to understand that attraction is the manifestation
of Krishna's opulence. So, now, here, we have to understand the important
principle. See, there is a cultural. And there is a spiritual. The cultural can
be specific. The spiritual is universal. And the spiritual can maniest in
diferent ways culturally. What does that mean? That means, Krishna is talking
about, you know, the spiritual, you know, the spiritual principle. That God
manifes..., God's opulence is manifest in this world, you know, through the
extraordinary manifestations of this world. So, when He is giving na..., those
extraordinary manifestations, as per the, you know, cultural and cosmological
understanding of His times. Now, of course, the Vedic understanding is not just
of His times. That means, it is not that Indra is just a God who existed five
thousand years ago. And does not exist now. You know. Or that, you know, you
know, any of the other people who are there. You know. Garuḍa and all those.
They do not exi..., they are not existing now. You know. They exist now, even
now. And they are, they are still a part of the comology. But, you know, they
may not be a part of our conceptual framework. Right now. Because we have been
educated in a different way. Now, as we keep, you know, studying the Vedic, you
know, scriptures, gradually, our conceptual framework will change. And then, we
will be able to relate with all these. And then, we will be able to understand
how these are the opulences of Krishna. You know. Right now, you know, see,
every example has a particular purpose. You know. Sometimes, if, if, we are, if,
say, we have never heard about, you know, if there are some e..., remote people
who live in some part of India who have never heard of, you know, say, some game
like tennis. You know. And then, they hear about some player. You know. Nadal
or Federer. Who are, you know, fifteen or sixteen times, they have won Grand
Slams. And that they hear some commentator saying, now, this player is, has as
much of fighting spirit like Nadal. Like whom? It is, it makes no sense to
them. So, the purpose of an exmaple is to make the unfamiliar familiar. The
purpose of a, if there may be, a concept is unfamiliar. To make it familiar,
example is given. But if the example itself is unfamiliar, then the concept
does..., the, the concept does not become familiar with the example. Then,
actually, the work increases double. That means, firstly, the, we have to
understand the, we have to come to the, what is the example? Ok. And then, I
have to understand, what is the ex..., what is the concept? And then, I, the
work becomes double that way. So, the work was made, meant to decrease. But the
work can increase sometimes. If the ca..., examples that we are giving are
unfamiliar. And that is why Srila Prabhupada, you know, would often give
examples that people would understand. So, for example, he would say that
"yajna".

How do we understand the concept of "yajna"? You know. For western peop..., for
wes..., western audience, the idea of a fire sacrifice was very exotic. The idea
that, oh, you lit a fire. And appraise some Gods. There is not much of that sort
of thing which they are ever familiar with. So, then, Prabhupada familiriasing
by saying, it is basically like tax. There is a universal government. And we
have to, you know, pay attribute to the universal government. Just as we pay tax
to our governments. Prabhupada give the example of a tax. So, similarly, now,
if, you know, you know, when, what is the ecstasy of Vaikuntha? So, you know,
what is the ecstasy of chanting Hare Krishna? And ecstasy of returning back to
Vaikuntha? Now, the scriptures may say that, the ecstasy of Vaikuntha is a
thousand time more than the ecstasy of "Brahmanand". People say, what is
"Brahmanand"? So, what was told to be explained, so, Vai..., the Vaikuntha
Ananda is unfamiliar. And if we say that this thousand times "Brahmanand".
"Brahmanand" is also unfamiliar to people. So, when we explain one unfamiliar
concept with another unfamiliar concept, then we do not make the unfamiliar
familiar. We double the unfamiliar, unfamiliarity. So, that is why Prabhu...,
Prabhupada would give example, say, one time, Prabhupada, what is the ecsta...,
what is the ecstasy of in Vaikuntha? Of going to Vaikuntha? So, Prabhupada said,
it is like floating in an ocean of LSD. Floating. Ah, yes, I want to go to
Vaikuntha. That is what his audience said at that time. So, now, we know, one of
the offenses against the holy name is to, you know, is, is to give some mundane
intepretation of the holy name. So, comp..., is comparing, you know, you know,
Vaikuntha to an ocean of LSD a material interpretation? No. You know. Material
interpretation is offensive when the material intepretation is reductive.
Reductive means that the spiritual is reduced down to the material. Then, it
becomes offensive. So, for example, if the de..., concept of deity is reduced
down to, you know, oh, it is just a stone representation which reminds us of the
Absolute Truth. So, when the spiritual is brought down to the material. When it
is reduced. And it is said there is no higher reality. You know. Why do you feel
good when you chant Hare Krishna? Oh, because you know, there are certain ways,
kind of, kind of chemicals that are fired in the brain. And those chemicals make
a person feel good. Now, that may be a part of the process. That may happen. But
that is not all that there is to it. Actually, beyond what has been happening in
the brain chemicals, beyond the whole body, bodily setup, there is the soul. And
the soul has been activated. And its natural joyfulness is being aroused. So,
therefore, you know, actually speaking, the important point is to be relevant.
So, Prabhupada was rem..., remarkably revelant..., relevant. The, you know, so,
now, you know, the principle that Krishna is talking about over here is that
whatever attracts people, that manifests His opulence. And Kri..., and, so,
similarly, in today's times, you know, there may be of different things that may
attract people. And when the, when s..., people are attracted, we have to be
able to have our Jnana Chakshu. Our raised knowledge clear enough to see that,
actually, this is an opulence of Krishna. And this opulence of Krishna is
manifested in this person in this way. And then, say, for example, there may be
a very form..., famous musician. Who attracts thousands and thousands, millions
of people with music. Now, that musician's opulence is actually Krishna
manifesting opulence through that person. So, similarly, it may be sport stars.
It may be business tycoon..., business magnates. It may be different kinds of
people. So, when, at one level, we could just say, all this is just maya. You
know. That is ok. That is one way of looking at it. But, you know, that is where
people's consciousness is. We cannot just dismiss the fact that most people are
conscious of material things. So, that if, if Arjuna had adopted such a
dismissive attitude, yes, everything material is maya. Just reject it. Then,
there would have been no need for the Vibhuti Yoga chapter. And if Krishna had
wanted us to adopt that approach. Then, Krishna would also not answer. You know.

        keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu

Kri..., you know, Arjuna is asking, you know, how can I rememer You? How can You
be remembered through material manifestation? And Krishna says, actually,
the material is illusion. Forget it. Nothing beyond matter do spirit. Krishna
does not say like that. Krishna gives exa..., gives examples by which Arjuna can
remember. So, for us, also, you know, when Prabhupada was traveling in a plane.
And that time, there was Charlie Chaplin movie. So, Prabhupada was laughing at
the jokes over there. And then, when devotees asked that, you know, Prabhupada,
you know, that, that, generally, devotees' idea is anything that you cannot see
explicitly connected with Krishna, that must be maya. So, why, Prabhupada? They
were, they were bewildered. Prabhupada watching a Charlie Chaplin movie. And
laughing. And laugh..., Prabhupada was hilari..., enjoying it. And they then
asked Prabhupada. Prabhupada said that actually, Charlie Chaplin's humour is a
manifestation of Krishna. You know. Krishna's, you know, capacity for humour is
manifested in a sma..., very small fragmental way through Charlie Chaplin. So,
this is the view of connection. Prabhupada said this humour is original. And it
is the spark of Krishna. Krishna's qualities. So, you know, you know, that means
the karmi way would be of looking at things would be, oh, this humour is so
nice. Let us enjoy. Enjoy. Enjoy. And do not think of anything else. Laugh so
that you, you know, you know, so, you know, the, you know, so that you can
for..., forget your sufferings. And many people say that, you know, you have to
laugh to stop from crying. Now, material life makes us miserable. And we want to
cry. So, to forget that, just laugh. Laugh. Laugh away. And the other extreme
would..., that is a karmi way of looking at things. The jnani way of looking
at things would be, hey, this is all illusion. So, all place of suffering. And
this laughter is also a part of suffering. Part of the illusion which will
perpetuate our suffering. But the bhakta ways to see the connection. To see the
connection between things and Krishna. So, there is this, so, that is the
Vibhuti of Krishna that is manifesting through a particular person. Now, we do
not go and start a, a, a, start watching Charlie Chaplin movies. To think, oh,
let me see the Vibhuti of Krishna through that. You know. That is not the only
way to see Krishna's Vibhuti. You know. Kri..., we can remember Krishna even
go..., by going to the temple. And by seeing the deities. And by reading about
Krishna's pastimes. You know. That is a direct way. And that is the primarily
recommended way. But the point is that Krishna Consciousness does not have to be
limited only to activities that are explicitly Krishna Conscious. That means
going to the temple. Studying the scriptures. Chanting the holy names.
Associating with devotees. Traveling to pilgrimages. So, these are explicitly
devotional activities. And, you know, they help us definitely in practicing
Krishna Consciousness. And becoming Krishna Conscious. And they are vital. But
we should not pigeonhole Krishna Consciousness only into these activities.
Krishna Consciousness extends everywhere. The jurisdiction of Krishna
Consciousness is everywhere as Prabhupada has said in the Seventh Chapter. So,
now, how can we be Krishna Conscious in what we are anyway conscious of?

See, when we are in the world, at that time, there will be certain things which
we will be conscious of. Just by the fact that we are in the world. There are
certain politicians. There are certain sport stars. There are certain movie
stars. They are constantly in the news. People are talking about them. So, it is
not that we have to delight in those things constantly. But it is not that we
have to reject all of them entirely as mundane gossip. If there are times when
we have to, we are exposed to those. We are, we are, we are in..., inter...,
interacting with those things in some way or the other. Then, we try to see the
Krishna factor. So, even in the material manifestations, whatever is
extraordinary in our times. You know. That would be a manifestation of Krishna.
You know. That would be a manifestation of Krishna. So, how is it a
manifestation of Krishna? Because in this particular generation, in this
culture, that person. Or that project is, you know, attracting people's
attention. And that capacity to attract people's attention is ultimately coming
from Krishna. So, we do not want to get specifically attracted to that
manifestation. But whatever attraction is by anyway there. Either in our mind.
Or in people's mind. Because of which, our, al..., at a, con..., con...,
consciousness or attention also goes sometimes there. Then, we connect that to
Krishna. So, often, we have to, you know, illustrate eternal principles with
contextual examples. So, the, you know, examples that are given in the Bhagavad
Gita of Krishna's Vibhuti, they are, you know, they are also factual. That
means, there is a part of the Vedic cosmology which is always true. But they are
not what people are familiar with right now. So, we can give examples of
Krishna's Vibhuti based on what is familiar. And through that, help people to
come closer to Krishna. And that way, you know, they can move, you know, they
can gradually become Krishna Conscious. So, this is the principle of Vibhuti.
So, whatever attracts u..., whatever attracts us. Whatever attracts people. We
connect that with Krishna. And by connecting that with Krishna, we become
Krishna Conscious. You know. Through the things of which we are anyway
conscious. So, if we are in a, if we are students have been in a class. And
there is a student who is brilliant. You know. That student answers all the
questions. Now, there, there will be, naturally, that person will be attracted
to others. Will be attractive to the others. So, then, you know, you know, that
excellent student, we can see that this student's intelligence is actually
manifestation of Krishna. So, if this student can attract so many people, then
how much more can Krishna attract? And when I develop my relationship with
Krishna, how much, you know, how much joy will be there in that relationship?
Like that, we can contemplate. And we can move closer to Krishna through that.
So, the whole process of bhakti yoga is the process of not rejection. But
connection. And that connection of matter with spirit is revealed in a beautiful
way through this Chapter of "Vibhuti Yoga". So, now, Krishna will tell in the
last verse, in the second last, in the last but one verse of this chapter of how
He will be, how actually everything is but a spark of His splendor. Let us look
at this verse.

        yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ
        śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā
        tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ
        mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam

"yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ". "śrīmad". "yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ". So,
wherever one sees "vibhūti". You kno. "śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā". So, whatever
existence is, you know, you know, wherever there is beautiful. "śrī-mat" is
beautiful. Like we have the word "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". So, the "Bhāgavatam" is
the book of the "Bha...", is the book about "Bhagavān". And "Śrīmad" is that
which is filled with beauty. It is the beauty of the intimate love of the Lord
with His devotees. "ūrjitam eva vā". That which is beautiful. That is glorious.
And that, you know, all that is beautiful, you know, all that is opulent. All
that is beautiful. All that is glorious. That is "mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam". It
is manifesting. "mama tejo-’ṁśa". My effulgence a spark. A fragment. A spark.
You know. So, you know, a, it is but a spark of My splendor. So, a devotee,
you see, we can, if we are attracted only to the sparks. The sparks will give us
a little pleasure. But that pleasure will soon end. And then, we will be left
with nothing. So, instead of being attracted to the sparks. We will let the
sparks remind us of the whole. And then, redirect our attraction to the whole.
28:06
