Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9UqNlbdHJM0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=9UqNlbdHJM0&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_107_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_19_to_26_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=bviMQMY1NUjd2xm3hLdfIgUD3lx8MTU0ODQ4ODk4M0AxNTQ4NDAyNTgz

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we
are about to start wth the description of the "vibhūti"s of Krishna. So, Arjuna
has accepted from 10.12 onwards the conclusion that Krishna is the ultimate
truth. And then, he makes a request. In 10.16-17-18, asking:

        vistareṇātmano yogaṁ

Please describe in detail Your glories.

        yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān
        imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi

Your "vibhūti"s by which You have pervaded this world. So, Krishna will start
describing from 10.19. You know. Let us look at the first verse. So, from here
onward, 19 to 42. It is a list of, you know, the "vibhūti"s of Krishna. Along
with some, espe..., some m..., introductory verses. And some concluding verses.
So, we will look at the introductory verse. And then, try to understand what is
happening when Krishna is identifying Himself with certain things in the world.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        hanta te kathayiṣyāmi
        divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
        prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha
        nāsty anto vistarasya me

So, "hanta te". "hanta" is yes. Actually, "hanta" is expression of joy. Or
delight. "kathayiṣyāmi". Yes. I will speak. "divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ". You, my,
m..., "ātma-vibhūtayaḥ". My glories. My opulences. You know. You know. At
divine, they are, I will speak about them. But when I speak, what will? I will
speak. "prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha". "prādhānyataḥ". I will speak the principle
ones amongst them. "nāsty anto vistarasya me". Because My glories are endless.
Actually, there is no limit to those, you know, opulences. Now, at first glance,
this might seem to be like an egomaniac statement. You know. If we ask, you
know, somebody comes to a get together. A party. Or a meeting. And we tell that
person, please introduce yourself. And he says, how? My introduction is endless.
You know. I will just speak a few points about my introduction. You know. What
kind of arrogant person this is? So, well, he would speak like that. Feel like
that. And maybe even speak like that about that person who says my glories are
endless. They, and, and we would be justified in many ways in speaking such a
thing. Then, how do we understand that Krishna speaking like this about His own
glories? That My glories are endless? Here, the important point is again to see
that there is a context to what Krishna is speaking. In the con..., if we think
that Krishna is proud, then we just have to look at Kri..., what Krishna is
doing. He is a charioteer. So, actions speak louder than words. And Krishna's
actions are showing that, out of love, He is becoming the servant of His
devotee. And He is taking the menial position of a charioteer. Which is like a
chauffeur's position. You know. And, you know, certainly, that is not a position
that a status-hungry person will ever take up. But what Krishna is doing over
here is, answering Arjuna's question. And giving all of us an opportunity to
redirect our attraction from the things of this world to the Lord who is the
source of all those doings. And whose attractiveness manifests fragmentally in
the things of this world. So, you know, you know, there is a doctor who, you
know, who says to, to a patient who is critically sick. The patient must do
some very, you know, urgently needed surgery. Otherwise, the patient will die. But
the patient is doubtful. Should I do this surgery? Is the doctor competent
enough? Will I recover? Is it necessary? All the doubts are there. So, maybe,
the patient is thinking. Maybe, I will go to some other doctor. And some other
doctor. And when the patient, doctor recognises that. No. This patient is sick.
And needs surgery immediat..., and doctor may say, actually, I have done
hundreds of surgeries like this. And even if you go to any of the other doctors,
all those doctors are my students, only. And I have trained them. And now, if
that is a fact, if that is a reality, if it is true that that doctor has only
trained the other students. Then, when the doctor speaks that reality, that is
not out of ego. That is because of necessity. So, it is necessary for this, you
know, patient to have the regulative, faith in the doctor by which the doctor
can heal the patient. Similarly, you know, the con..., conditioned soul has the
doubt. Should I surrender to Krishna? Will it really make me happy? You know.
There are so many other things which also promise happiness. Maybe, I should go,
enjoy those things, also. So, Krishna tells, actually whatever attractive you
find in this world, Krishna will tell this in 10.41. In the conclusion of this
chapter that:

        mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam

"mama tejo-’ṁśa". It is all, but a spark of My splendor. The spark. So, Krishna
is telling that actually, you do not have to. You do not have to go in all these
directions. Because a spark can give only a little bit of light. There is the
whole flyer. The whole sun can give much more light. So, Krishna says, all the
things of this world, whatever beauty they have, that is like a spark. And I am
the whole. I am the source. And what I can give you is far greater. Therefore,
you know, it is for this purpose that Krishna speaks. And to the extent we are
attracted to the things of this world, to that extent, we are diseased. In our,
the misdirection of our desires from God to the things of the world, you know,
without seeing their connection with God, that misdirection is the cause of our
suffering. So, you know, the redirection of our desires is what is required.
That is the whole process of healing. And that redirection requires
philosophical understanding. So, Krishna is offering that philosophical
unerstanding to us. And, you know, that is why He says, yes, there are so many
attractive things in this world. And they are all connected with Krishna. So,
Krishna will not give a list of everything in the world. He will give
"prādhānyataḥ". Principal to teach the, to demonstrate and, you know,
emphasize the principle. Which He will give in the conclusion. So, the word
"vibhūti". "vibhūti". What does it mean actually? The word "bhūta" is often used
for existence. You know. You know. You know. "brahma-bhūta". That means
spiritual existence. So, "vib...", the word "brahma-bhūta" comes many times in
the Bhagavad Gita.

        brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

That will come right at the, towards the end. 18.54. That one who is situated in
the "brahma-bhūta" platform, that person is joyful. Because free from hankering
and lamentation. So, "bhūta" means existence. "vibhūti" means special existence.
"vi" is, "vi" generally a prefix that, you know, means "vishesha". "vibhūti"
means, you know, actually, special existence. Special manifestation. So, in this
world, there are hundreds of things. You know. If a log of wood is lying on the
ground. That is "vibhūta". But that is not a "vibhūti". That is also existing.
But if from several logs of wood, an ar..., artistic masterpiece, maybe a
table with intricate curve, carvings. And, you know, polishing is there. Oh.
That attracts the attention. So, "vibhūti" means those things, those "bhūti"s,
tho..., tho..., that are "vishesha". Those material manifestations that helps
them special attraction. Those which attract our attention. And Krishna will
explain that these which attract our attention, you know, can be connected with
Krishna. So that we become attracted to Krishna instead of those things. So, let
us try to understand how this "Vibhuti Yoga" works. So, "vibhūti" is the
manifestation, the extraordinary manifestation of this world. Now, yoga means
connection. So, "Vibhuti Yoga" which is the name of this chapter in sanskrit.
"The Opulence of the Absolute" is the English name. "Vibhuti Yoga". So, how does
"vibhūti" bring about yoga? You know. The things of this world attract us. You
know. There may be a giant building. A magnificent, you know, shape. Or star
spor..., or excellent sport star. An eloquent speaker. All these are various
things in the material world. Things. People that attract us. So, "vibhūti"s are
there always. And they will attract us. But when we understand philosophically
that these "vibhūti"s are coming from Krishna, then that Krishna connection,
that perception of the Krishna connection becomes the yoga. So, there may be
some mo..., movie star. Who is extremely good-looking. People are attracted to
that movie star. That also, that beauty of that movie star. Or that is also
a "vibhūti". But that "vibhūti" does not remind people of Krishna. That does not
lead to yoga. That leads to bhoga. That leads people to sense gratification. You
know but when one understands that, ok, the, you know, var..., various beautiful
manifestation of this world, various powerful manifestations, whatever
attractive manifestation is. Beauty. Power. Strength. Beauty. Power.
Intelligence. Whatever. All of them, they are getting a, you know, they are just
reflecting a spark of Krishna's splendor. So, when we, when there is perception
of the Krishna connection o..., with, from the "vibhūti" to Krishna. Then, that
will lead to yoga. And it is that connection, that Krishna is highlighting in
this chapter. So, you know, now, there are different ways in which one can
approach the spiritual reality. Let us look at these ways. So, in Vedanta, there
are basically, you know, Vedanta is the Ve..., Ve..., you know, the
"Vedānta-sutra" is the primary book of Vedanta. But Vedanta is one of the six
systems of philosophy. And that has theistic. And athei..., and personalistic
and non-personalistic interpretations. So, but Vedanta focuses on radical
differentiation between matter and spirit. Naiti. Naiti. Naiti. That is the
Upanishadic way. The Vedantic way. Am I, Am I this body? Am I these fingers? Am
I these hands? Am I this skin? Am I this blood? No. No. No. No. So, in this way,
no. No. No. By thus saying no, what happens is, one rejects matter. And then,
moves towards spirit. And that is why generally in the Upanishadic, the Vedantic
way, renunciation of the world is considered very important. Because matter is,
you know, matter is false. Matter is illusory. Matter causes bondage. So, one
should give up matter. So, there is a radical differentiation between matter and
spirit. That is the Vedantic way. Now, there is the Bhagavat viddhi. Yes. Now, we
will see the, just before that. Before we see this way. This Vedantic
differentiation between matter and spirit. We see this in the Bhagavad Gita,
also. In the Second Chapter, especially. Krishna is describ..., is pointing
towards the soul with many negative epithets. You know.

        nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi
        nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ
        na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo
        na śoṣayati mārutaḥ

So, in 2.23, He describes that, no. No. No. The soul is not burnt by fire. The
soul is not pierced by weapons. The soul is not win..., you know, you know,
blown away by the wind. The soul is not, you know, you know, you know, dissolved
by water. Like that.

        acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam
        akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca

Same. Negatives. "a". "a". "a". "a". No. No. No. N..., there is previous verse.
2.23 was no. No. 2.24 is "a". "a". "a". Both no and "a" are negative describers.
Negative prefixes. So, the differentiation between matter and spirit on a
radical basis is talked about in the Bhagavad Gita, also. You know. The Bhagavad
Gita is an integration of, you know, various, you know, strands of Vedic
thought. And at this one, this particular Vedantic, you know, you know,
differentiation between matter and spirit is also talked about in the Bhagavad
Gita. So, apart from this Vedantic way of differentiating between matter and
spirit. And then, leaving matter so that one can app..., approach spirit. There
is alt..., other ways, also. There is the Bhagavat way. The Bhagavat way, the
focus is on sound. Sound is the way from matter to spirit. That is the Bhagavat
viddhi. So, what does it mean?

       iti mūrty-abhidhānena
       mantra-mūrtim amūrtikam

The "Bhāgavatam" describes, you know, you know, "iti mūrty-abhidhānena". One can
worship the form. What will? "mantra-mūrtim amūrtikam". That Lord who is
unmanifest. "amūrtikam". As now manifest as "mantra-mūrtim". As the sacred
sound. So, when we chant the Hare Krishna maha mantra. When we hear Krishna
Katha. At that time, what are we doing? We are i..., we are actually taking
shelter of sound. And that sound is enabling us to rise from matter to spirit.
So, sound is extremely important. And we will see that, often, when we are
feeling anxious. If we can just, you know, connect with the sound of the holy
name. Hear some soothing kirtan. Hear some, you know, now, you know, some
prayerful bhajan. Then is, immediately, the mind becomes calm. Why? Because our
consciousness is raised. Whatever be the specific cause for the agitation and
anxiety of the mind, the generic reason is the increase in the modes of passion,
ignorance. So, there is ignorance. Passion. Goodness. And transcendence. So, the
sound of the holy name exists and, and the sounds connected with Krishna, they
exist at the transcendental level. So, you know, beyond whatever causes, we,
might be there. You know, for the specific, you know, you know, for the specific
causes that may be there, that is what, of our problems, the, we may have to
address them at the practical level. But at the same time, when we hear and
think about Krishna at that, and especially exp..., expose ourselves to sound
vibrations. Then, those sound vibrations being at the transcendental level, they
lift us to the transcendental level. And by that way, we become purified. We
become purified and pacified. We rise from the contaminations, the lower modes
towards goodness and transcendence. And by that, the anxiety itself drops away
gradually. So, sound is the way from matter to spirit. That is the Bhagavat
viddhi. And that is our principle meth..., method of worship. We hear about
Krishna. Along with that, there is Tantra viddhi, also. Now, the word tantra
sometimes has a negative connotation. But that is not necessary it is negative.
The matt..., idea of tantra is matter itself can be used in a way to spirit. So,
tantra, you know, now, tantra is of two types. There is light...., right-hand.
And left-hand. So, right-hand tantra is auspicious. It is called as deity
worship. Deity worship. And the "Pāñcarātra" scriptures, where, you know, are
based on that principle itself. That, you know, you know, when the Lord
manifests as a deity, you know, the Lord manifests in all-attractive way. You
know. The Lord Himself is all-attractive. But here, when He manifests as a
deity, He is all-attrative. He becom..., manifests in all-attractive way means
that people can perceive Him. And if the deity is beautiful, deity is de..., you
know, gorgeously decorated. Prayerfully worshipped. Then, people feel, oh, so
beautiful. People feel attracted. So, the point is, matter, now, is the deity
matter? Actually, the deity is now, deity is Krishna. But the deity is made of
material elements. And the material elements are, you know, you know, you know,
you know, spiritualised by the invoking of the deity, invoking the Lord through
the "prana pratistha". So, the important point is that matter can be a means to
spirit. So, we use our senses to behold the deity. To serve the deity. To cook
for the deity. To dance for the deity. And in this way, even our material body,
material senses can be used in Krishna's service. So, now, these two are
different approaches. Now, I am not the body. I am the soul. I am not material.
I am spiritual. That is one approach.

And deity worship is another approach. The underlying phi..., purpose and
philosophy is the same. The pupose is, we have to raise our consciousness from
the material level to the spiritual level. You know. And that can be achieved by
various means. If somebody just stays at the material level, consciousness. Even
if that person seems to be carefully worshipping the deity, that person does not
really, you know, make spiritual advancement. Unless there is a tran..., and there
is a redirection of the desires from material to spiritual. Otherwise, the
person may rem..., remain ritualistic worshipper. So, now, in tantra viddhi,
there is left-hand and right-hand. So, right-hand is deity worship which is
sattvic worship. And then, there is, here, left-hand tantra is tamasic worship.
So, tamasic means, you know, we may have seen some images on television. In the
west, also, this is their voodoo which craft. You know, Somebody makes a,
somebody wants to hurt some, some, hurts somebody else. Then, that person goes
to a person who can do black magic. Tantric. And the tantric, you know, makes a
figurine of that person. And then, that person pinches that person with a
needle. Aaa..., and that person far away starts screaming. Now, much of this may
be exaggeration. Some of which may be entirely fabrication, also. But there is,
you know, you know, there is underlying reality in it. That there are people.
There are people who have those powers. And tantra is a means by which people
can be hurt. So, generally, left-hand tantra is destructive. And devotees, you
know, do not, practice lef..., you know, or c..., encourage anyone to pracice
that kind of tantra. It is tamasic. You know. And in this tantra, only, there is
the whole idea that, you know, sex can also be a means to approach God. Now,
when sex is used within dharmic framework, then it is, you know, then that
performance of dharma gradually elevates a person. So, but the idea here is that
sex itself can be means to approach God. Matter can take one to spirit. That is
not idea that is supported in the scriptures. In fact, it is a dangerous idea.
Because, you know, you know, there are few things that make us as bodily
conscious, as material conscious, materially conscious as sex. And they think
that by doing that activity more and more, one will become spiritually
conscious. You know. That is like saying that by drinking poison, I will become
healthy. You know. It is not possible. You know. You know. So, now, what is
happening in Vibhuti Yoga? Let us look at this. So, the point is, extraordinary
material manifestations reflect spark of Krishna's glory. That is what He will
tell in 10.41. We will come to that in due course of time. Then, you know, you
know, such manifestations naturally attract our attention. And so can be used as
impetuses, is, to remember Krishna. The purpose is to focus on Krishna. Not the
specific manifestation. You know. So, we look at attractive things. Most people
will just look at the attractive things and become attracted. You know.
Spiritualists will look at the attractive things. Will fo..., you know, admit
that these are attractive. But then, will look at the, you know, source of the
attractiveness of that thing. And will move from that particular thing to
Krishna. Move the attention. That is how one makes spiritual advancement. So,
that is what Prabhupada will explain in this chapter of, you know, you know, you
know, you know, this "Vibhuti Yoga". So, let us look at the "vibhūti" as
described in this chapter. So, ten, you know, this starts from ten point
twent..., 19 was an introductory verse where Krishna was telling that, now, I
will describe these to you. And I will describe the principle once among these.
You know. So:

        aham ātmā guḍākeśa
        sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ
        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca
        bhūtānām anta eva ca 

"aham ātmā guḍākeśa". So, Arjuna is referred to here as "guḍākeśa". "guḍākeśa"
means one who has conquered sleep. Actually, the word "guḍākeśa" has many
means. Meanings. So, one of the meanings is, you know, you know, "guḍā", you
know, the "guḍā" is darkness. The, the "guḍākeśa". One who has conquered sleep.
Another meaning of "guḍākeśa" is "guḍā". "guḍā" refers to Gud Jagri. And "ḍā" is
Brahma. "iśa" is Shiva. So, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura explains that
"guḍākeśa" means one who gives sweetness like Jagri even to Brahma and Shiva.
So, what does this mean? That actually the reciprocation of love between the
Lord and His devotees is so endearing that it attracts even great personalities
like Brahma and Shiva. And that reciprocation is possible when the devotees have
devotion. The Lord always has love for the devotees. But sinc..., the devotee
is, with sincerity and the intensity of the love of the devotees, that, you
know, brings forth the love from the heart. And makes the loving pastimes
possible. So, in, so, you know, here, Arjuna because of the sincerity and the
intensity of his devotion to Krishna, has, you know, made, you know, Krishna
ha..., Krishna serve him as the charioteer. And seeing this extraordinary
reciprocation of love brings tears, gives extraordinary devotional sweetness,
even to the hearts of Brahma and Shiva. So, the person whom, b..., allows this
wonderfully sweet manifestation of the Lord's, you know, love, you know, you
know, who makes this lo..., manifestation of Lord's love possible, that person
is called as "guḍākeśa". So, "aham ātmā guḍākeśa". I am the "ātmā". Which
"āt...", what kind of "ātmā"? "sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ". Who is situated in the
hearts of all living beings. "bhūtāśaya". I am situated in the heart of all
living beings. "sarva-bhūtāśaya". So, now, does this support an impersonalist
conclusion? All, the same soul is situated in all living beings. And I am that
soul. No. Krishna has earlier clearly stated that. "yena sar...", you know,
that, actually, the soul is, you know, fragmental. The soul is actually never to
be cut. What it is, "acchedyo ’yam". Soul is, what it is, it is always that
way. "avikāryo ’yam". It is unchanging. And Krishna has also said that the soul
is present in one body. In from here, if soul goes to another body. So, if the
soul is, the same soul is present in your body. And my body. The same soul is
present in all bodies. Then, there is no point in saying that the soul goes from
one body to another body. So, this clearly, or the word "ātmā" here, refers not
to the bo..., soul. It refers to the Supersoul. So, Krishna is basically, in
this first verse, telling, in the beginning itself, when He starts His
description of the opulences. He begins by describing how, His pervad..., how He
pervades space and time. So, it, space means, this living, in this existence,
there are many living beings. And Krishna says in the heart of all living
beings. "sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ". So, I pervade their heart. And then, there is
time. There is past. Present. And future. There is beginning. Middle. And end.
And Krishna says:

        aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca
        bhūtānām anta eva ca

I am the beginning. The middle. And the end. What does it mean? Beginning,
middle, and end of all living beings? Actually, you know, you know, what it
means essentially is that, you know, you know, "aham ādiś ca". I am the, we see
that, actually, the beginning, we could, you know, take it at various levels.
That all of, all of crea..., existence, beginning, there is just, the spiritual,
there is just "Mahavishnu". So, in that sense, He is the beginning of
everything. The name in, when we look at specific universe, there is,
"Garbhodakaśāyī" Vishnu is the first. And even within life, actually, the way
life eme..., every life emerges, it is quite a miracle. You know. The way, you
know, the ma..., male and the female parts come together. And how while I get
as I got this form. And eventually, a, you know, fully developed child comes
out. And that child goes up to become a person like you and me. That is quite an
extraordinary thing. 25:30
