Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z3KBd9iGg7g
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=WoH9JDvIlWfeymjyJ2F2kF1Pjoh8MTU0ODQ4ODk1N0AxNTQ4NDAyNTU3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_106_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_10_Text_12_to_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=Z3KBd9iGg7g&event=video_description

    prapanna parijataya
    totra vetraika panaye
    jnana mudraya krishnaya
    gitamrita duhe namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We
discussed in the previous class about the Chatur Sloki Bhagavad Gita. And how it
gives the essence of the Gita. Based on its context and its content. You know.
So, the context was how it comes after Krishna has said that I am going to speak
the "paramaṁ vacaḥ". The supreme words. And Arjuna, you know, gives his
understanding. Conclusive understanding after that. And the content, it is, it
covers, sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana. It ho..., shows how jnana is a part of
bhakti. And it is integrated into bhakti. So, let us look at one more aspect of
this jnana. And then, we will move forward to, you know, the next verses. So,
sym..., there is a symbiotic relationship between knowledge and devotion. 10.8
describes knowledge leads to devotion.

    iti matvā bhajante māṁ
    budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

So, "iti matvā". One who understand this. What does one understand? That Krishna
is the Supr..., you know, source of everything. He is ultimate reality. So,
"bhajante māṁ". "bhāva-samanvitāḥ". Such a person acquires knowledge. And
becomes wholeheartedly devoted to Me. So, here, Krishna is telling that
knowledge will, you know, about Me, will lead to devotion. But then, in the
subsequent verses, 10.8 to, you know, 10.10 and 10.11, what does He say? He
says, you know, you know, devotion will lead to knowledge. So, He says, that if
you, "bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam", if you v..., de..., practice devotional service
to Me. Serve Me with affection. Then, "dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ". That knowledge
will give, and devotion will give knowledge. So, what, how is this going about?
First, Krishna says, knowledge leads to devotion. Then, devotion leads to
knowledge. So, what comes first? Actually, you know, you know, there has to be
some basic philosophical understanding about Krishna. But as we render service,
the knowledge deepens. And the knowledge increases our affection further. And
when we serve with affection, then Krishna gives greater knowledge to us. So,
there is symbiotic relationship between the two. This knowledge, which Krishna
is talking about, both in the beginning and in the end. This is the, got nothing
to do with impersonal jnana. Because the first knowledge, Krishna is talking
about is the knowledge of Krishna's glories. That is:

    ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
    mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

You know. You know. You know. You know. I am the source of everything. I am
sustainer of everything. And then, after that, second knowledge that He has
talked about is "buddhi. You know. "buddhi".

    dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
    yena mām upayānti te

This is also knowledge. Which enables one to come closer to Krishna. Way to
return back to Krishna. So, this is also bhakti, anukula jnana. So, bha...,
either way, Kri..., this knowledge, you know, of how glorious Krishna is. And
knowledge of how to go closer to Krishna. You know. This is not talking about
impersonal jnana. So, bhakti-yoga integrates within it jnana. But it is not
dependent on jnana. It is, bhakti-yoga in and of itself is independent of
jnana. Because bhakti-yoga is an independent process. And in fact, all other
processes depend on bhakti-yoga. So, you know, whatever knowledge is required.
Even when whatever knowledge is acquired. Say, for example, when we are studying
philosophy right now, are we do, doing, following the process of jnana-yoga? No.
We are doing:

    śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
    smaraṇaṁ ...

We are doing bhakti. So, our purpose is Krishna. Our process is Krishna. And,
you know, the source is also Krishna. That means, the knowledge, we are coming,
getting is not from some impersonal source. It is from Krishna Himself. And
then, our purpose is also not that we want to go to some light beyond Krishna.
It is Krishna. And, you know, you know, our, you know, process is also centered
on Krishna. We are discussing about Krishna. So, in that sense, it is not bhakti
pratikula-jnana. It is bhakti anukula jnana. So, now, after this, Kri..., Arjuna
speaks his, you know, you know, understanding of the essential me..., you know,
message of the Bhagavad Gita. So:

    arjuna uvāca

    paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma
    pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān
    puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam
    ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

    āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve
    devarṣir nāradas tathā
    asito devalo vyāsaḥ
    svayaṁ caiva bravīṣi me

So, here, it is described, Arjuna is saying, "paraṁ brahma". So, you are the
Supreme Brahman. Now, the mayavadis and the impersonalists, you know, are very
fond of, you know, you know, speaking the, you know, Vedic aphorism. You know.
"Aham Brahmasmi". It is definitely true. We are Brahman. And this has bee
considered by Shankaracharya as one of the Mahavakyas of the Upanishads. This is
also fine. But then, you know, what is its meaning? It is not saying "Ahaṁ paraṁ
Brahmāsmi". It is simply "Ahaṁ Brahmāsmi". So, I am Brahma. That is definitely
true. But beyond my being Brahma, there is a higher reality. And that higher
reality is the reality of Krishna. Who is the "paraṁ brahma". So, I may say that
I am an Indian. And the Prime Minister of India may also say that my ancestor is
Indian. So, if I say I am an Indian. The Prime Minster is Indian. Therefore, I
conclude I am the Prime Minister. No. That is not correct. There is Brahm..., in
Brahma, also, there is, there is diversity amidst unity. You know. There is in
spiritual level. There is all, you know, you know, the unity of everything is
Brahman. But within that Brahman, there are levels of reality. There is
diversity amidst unity. So, then, "paraṁ", "pavit", "paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma".
"dhāma". "dhāma" means abode. You are the supreme abode. I, as Krishna has told
earlier in the Ninth Chapter.

    mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

In one sense, everything resides on Him. And then, He is the supr..., so, you
know, in a, in the sense of the mentals of the universe, it, Krishna is
ultimately maintaining everything. Of course, He is not burdened as Krishna
has also stated in Ninth Chapter. When He said:

    na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni
    
We discussed that inconceivable relationship earlier. You know. But the
important point is that "paraṁ dhāma". He is the ultimate abode. He is ul..., He
i..., He, where, He, He is the, you know, abode for all of us. He is, He is
non-different from His abode. You know. You know. Goloka Vrindavan is once
non-different from Krishna. So, He is there, He want, that is where we want,
want ultimately to go. That is the supreme destination where we will become
happy. And He is also the supreme abode for our hearts' aspirations. You know,
we, we, you know, we pin our hopes on some person. Or some plan. Or something.
We think once I get my own house. Once I get my own car. Once I get that job.
Once I get that spouse. You know. We pin all our hopes on those things. Those
become the abode of our aspirations. Abode of our dreams. But actually, they are
all fallible shelters. They cannot give us permanent solace. That Krishna is
"paraṁ dhāma". So, "pavitraṁ" and "paramaṁ". So, "pavitraṁ paramaṁ" can be seen
as you are, you know, the purest and the greatest. So, "pavitraṁ" is actually,
we have discussed "apāpa-viddham". You know. That:

    asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham
    kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr
    yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ
 
So, "apāpa-viddham". "śuddham". Prabhupada had translated as, ant...,
prophylactic and antiseptic in the "Īśopaniṣad". In, you know, Mantra Five. You
know. So, you know, you know, you know, you know, "apāpa-viddham".

    sa paryagāc chukram akāyam avraṇam
    asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham

    kavir manīvi...
    r...
    sūḥ...
    parisūḥ...

    kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr

So, actually, this Mantra Eight, Mantra Eight, where it talks about the learned
person understands the Absolute Truth to be supremely pure. So, pure and
purifying. You know. Whatever impurities are there in the past, they will be
removed. And once we have Krishna in the heart, no further impurities will come
in, also. So, in this way, what Krishna is telling over here is, what Arjuna is
saying here about Krishna is that "pavitraṁ". You are pure. The, you are pure.
And "paramaṁ". So, the word "pavitraṁ" indicates that, now, now, Krishna will
not be having any sinful desires like we have. You know. That is not the context
of the word ""pavitraṁ" over here. "pavitraṁ" means, in general, any kind of
contamination. So, even from the view, point of view of transcendence. Even
goodness is a contamination. So, Krishna is uncontaminated by any of the modes.
"paramaṁ". He is the supreme being. "bhavān". So, "bhavān" is a respectful
address. You, oh Lord. You are all this in. So, "puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ". So, the word
"puruṣaṁ" is again, it is a very clear personalist designation. A personalist
reference. So, now, Krishna is clearly telling "bha...", Arjuna is clearly
saying "bhavān". To You, he is saying. He is not saying that, oh, there is some
personal light within You. Which is the supreme reality. He says, no. You are
the "paraṁ brahma". You are. And as if that were not clear enough. Just that
that the two people are standing in front of Vishnu. And having the discussion.
And one is referring to the other. And saying "bhavān". The, and He is also
using the very personal reference. "puruṣaṁ". And what kind of "puruṣaṁ" are
you? "śāśvataṁ". So, it is not that from the impersonal, some light has
manifested from, you know, so, from, you know, the impersonal light, some
personal form has manifested temporarily. No. "śāśvataṁ". You know. You know.
Eternally. This. And "divyam". And this form which you have, youwho are my
Lord, You are transcendental. The word 10:52
