Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8sWNKLetwh8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=8sWNKLetwh8&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_091_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_07_Text_19_to_24_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=vsq5YqpzZCsWSy_wW1pi4HFR34l8MTU0ODQ4ODUxNEAxNTQ4NDAyMTE0

        sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
        loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
in the Seventh Chapter discussing the second section of people who surrender to
Krishna. Those who do not surrender to Krishna. And those who surrender to
something other than Krishna. So, you know, you know, 7.14 talks about how we
should surrender to Krishna. And then, we will go beyond maya. 7.15 talks about
the four categories of people who do not surrender to Krishna. And then, 7.16 to
19 talks about the four categories of people who start worshipping Krishna. And
eventually, they surrender to Krishna. So, from seven point four..., oh, sixteen
talks about "bhajante". And from "bhajante", the progression moves onwards. And
then, it comes in 7.19 to, you know, you know, "prapadyate", to surrender. So,
they become, you know, they become one-pointed in that devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. So, let us discuss that now. You know. So, 7.19 is:

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante
        jñānavān māṁ prapadyate
        vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti
        sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

So, "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante". After many lifetimes. "jñānavān". When the person
becomes "jñānavān". You know. "māṁ prapadyate". They surrender to Me. What is
their understanding of the surrender to Me? "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". They
understand that Lord Vasudeva is everything. There is no reality higher than
Lord Vasudeva. "sa mahātmā". Those such great souls. "su-durlabhaḥ". They are
extremely rare. So, here, Krishna is talking about a progression from one level
of reality to higher levels of reality. So, "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante". After many
many lifetimes. So, what is He referring to? He is referring to the four
categories of people who came to Him in 7.16. So, āsu..., those are people who
start doing "bhajante". You know. "bhajante" to "prapadyate". It is a
progression. Which can take, you know, several lifetimes depending on the
intensity of the practice. There are many people who can, who may do bhakti as a
casual activity within the journey of their lives. But beyond that, there is
bhakti c..., which can be performed in a much more serious, much more, you know,
you know, intense and single-pointed level. So, that is the kind of bhakti,
which Krishna is talking about over here. When He talks about "prapadyate". So,
"bahūnāṁ janmanām ante". That after many lifetimes, one moves from the
"bhajante" to "prapadyate". "jñānavān māṁ prapadyate". So, now, Krishna has
talked about four categories of people. "ārto", "jijñāsur", "arthārthī", and
"jñānī". All four people are "su-kṛtinaḥ". All four people are, you know, you
know, having pious credits. What is this pious credits referring to? This
actually refers to spiritual pious credits. In the sense that, they have done
some kind of, you know, you know, bhakti in some way. Not directly bhakti by
in, in knowing that it is bhakti. But some "janāḥ su-kṛtino" they have done
which is conducive to bhakti. That means they have, you know, the, while doing
gardening, water tulsi. Or while doing some service, you know, you know, given
some prasad to people. Or rendered some seva to vaishnava. While, you know,
giving charity in general, they gave some charity to, for Krishna's cause, also.
So, they are not doing consciously, thinking that this is devotional service.
They do it without that conscious understanding. But they somehow engage,
connect with Krishna. So, that sort of "su-kṛti" helps them. And with that
"su-kṛti" brings them to Krishna. And they start serving Krishna. They have in
"bhajante". But after many lifetimes, then they understand something. Because of
which, "bhajante", they do not ju..., they do not just remember. I mean, like
ser..., ser..., connecting with Krishna. And serving Krishna occasionally. When
they understand this, then they start Krishna, serving Krishna constantly. So,
"jñ...", "jñānavān māṁ prapadyate". Now, what is the conception that enables us
to make them "prapadyate". "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". That Vasudeva is everything.
You know. "sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ". Such great souls are extremely rare. you
know. "durlabhaḥ". He says. "sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ". "durlabhaḥ" is very
difficult. "su...", very rare. And "su-durlabhaḥ" is, you know, extremely rare.
Now, it is interesting, Krishna says they understand Vasudeva is everything.
That means that they understand that there is no reality beyond Vasudeva. Lord
Krishna has Himself told in 7.7, in the same chapter:

        mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
        kiñcid asti dhanañ-jaya

They understand this that there is no reality higher than Krishna. And because
of it, you know, they surrender to Krishna. When they surrender to Krishna,
thus what happens? "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". So, when they surrender like this to
Krishna, they become purified. They become elevated. And gradually, they become,
you know, you know, completely fixed in their worship of Krishna. That is
"sarvam". "prapadyate". It is interesting that, you know, although they
understand Vasudeva to be sarvam, you know, this is not pantheistic.
Pantheistic, as you remember, we discussed anyways, everything is God. So,
th..., although they understand Vasudeva is everything. That does not mean that
they surrender to everything. They surrender to Vasudeva. So, "vāsudevaḥ sarvam
iti" means, you know, God is a, Vasudeva is everything. But everything is not
Vasudeva. But Vasudeva is everything means, yes, Vasudeva is manifest
everywhere. Vasudeva is accessible everywhere. But it is not that everything is,
everything and everywhere is, everything is just Vasudeva. Vasudeva has his own
self-existence and self-glory in the spiritual world. Where He is manifest in
his transcendental turn..., personality. You know. So, they do not surrender to
everything. But they surrender to Vasudeva. You know. When Hiranyakashipu asks
Prahlada, where is your Vishnu? So, he says, "katga apraya", with my "katgun", I
am going to kill you. Let us see if your Vishnu comes and protects you. Is he
ever...? Where is he? Is he everywhere? Is he in this pillar? So, he says, yes.
Vishnu is everywhere. He is in this pillar, also. And then, Hiranyakashipu
assaults that pillar. And then, he, what happens is, Nrsimhadeva emerges from
there. Now, when Nrsimhadeva emerges from the pillar, Prahlada Maharaja does not
offer obeisances to the pillar. He offers obeisances. He offers prayers. He
offers garland to Nrsimhadeva. So, yes, the pillar can also be respected because
it is the place from which Lord Nrsimhadeva manifested. But the pillar itself is
not the ultimate object of worship. Because it is connected with Krishna, so it
also becomes sacred. But it is not in and of itself the ultimate object of
worship. Everything connected with Krishna, you know, especially if Krishna
has performed some pastimes in connection with that, that is sacred. And that is
worshipable. Although, it is, whatever is worshipable, does not mean that that
is the ultimate object of worship. See, worshipable can also mean that because
of its connection with the Absolute Truth, it also becomes sacred. So,
"vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti", the person understands. You know. The "jñānavān"
understands that Vasudeva is everything. But still, the "jñānavān" does not
surrender everything. "jñānavān" surrenders to, you know, you know, the,
Vasudeva. "māṁ prapadyate". "māṁ prapadyate". Surrenders to Me. So, Krishna is
telling over here this very significant truth that from the point of approaching
Him to surrender Him, it may take many lifetimes. Of course, if one practices
bhakti seriously, then:

        teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā
        mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt
        bhavāmi na cirāt pārtha
        mayy āveśita-cetasām

So, in 12.7, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna will tell that "ahaṁ samuddhartā". I
will lift such people out of material existence. Who are these people? These are
people who are the spiritualists. Those who are not just ordinary spiritualists.
But those who fix their mind on Him. And "na cirāt". Not after a long time. So,
bhakti is like an elevator. It can take us rapidly up. You know. Now, here, we
will discuss that these people, they are not directly practicing bhakti. They
are definitely approaching Krishna. And we can say that is bhakti. But that is
not suddha-bhakti. So, here, when Krishna says "bahūnāṁ janmanām ante", He is
referring to people who start approaching Him. And from the point of view, 
starting to approach Him, to the point of view of, completely set to the poin...,
level of completely seven notation. That may take time. That may take
progression. And that progression is what is talked about here in this verse.
So, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport here. Hmm.

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

You know. You know. So, Prabhupada quotes the "purusutta" section from the
Bhagava..., you know, from the "Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad". That chapter, m...,
three, verses 14 and 15. And what does he say over here?

        sahasra-śīrṣā puruṣaḥ
        sahasrākṣaḥ sahasra-pāt
        sa bhūmiṁ viśvato vṛtvā- 
        tyātiṣṭhad daśāṅgulam

        puruṣa evedaṁ sarvaṁ
        yad bhūtaṁ yac ca bhavyam
        utāmṛtatvasyeśāno
        yad annenātirohati

So, here, he is talking about how one understands that everything is Vasudeva.
So, "vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti". 10:30
