Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YhRXBbulgO0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=YhRXBbulgO0&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_011_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_09_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=mdz2-INBeSwxMgDnSug8kqzzLQF8MTU0MDEwMjM3MEAxNTQwMDE1OTcw

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we start with the third section of the Isopanisad. We have completed
from the introduction to mantra eight. So, the invocation to three, we were
talking about live in harmony with the Ishvara. Then mantras four to eight
talked about the Ishvara can be understood by spiritual vision. Now, how do we
develop that spiritual vision? That is through cultivating vidya and doing the
right upasana. So nine to eleven will talk about vidya and twelwe, thirteen,
fourteen will talk about upasana. Now, these verses, nine, ten, eleven, if we
look at them literally, their meanings seems to be quite confusing. The nine, we
will look at them in detail, but here a quick overc..., overview. The ninth
verse basically says that:

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'vidyām upāsate
        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

That those who are in, those who are in ignorance, they will go into darkness.
And those who are in knowledge, they will go into greater darkness. And then,
after that, it says that those who are in knowledge, and those who are in
darkness, actually speaking, there are two different results of this. And the
wise understand this. That, then after that, then one result is obtained by
cultivation of vidya, and another by the cultivation of avidya. And then the
ne..., third verse says that actually, when one cultivates vidya and avidya both
together, then one will go beyond the cycle of birth and death, and attain
liberation. So, now, first, it is saying that both vidya and avidya are bad.
In fact, vidya is worse than avidya. Then, it seems to say that vidya and avidya
will give two opposite results. And then, it says that vidya and avidya both
have to be cultivated together to beco..., attain liberation. So, what is going
on over here? So, actually, here, in these three mantras, as well as similarly
in the next three mantras, twelwe to fourteen, the same words, vidya and avidya
are used. But their meanings are different in each of these mantras. So, we
will look at the meanings of these mantras through a table, and we will see how
the same word can have different meanings depending on a different contexts.

So, in the fir..., ninth mantra, wh..., what does avidya mean?

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'vidyām upāsate

So, there, avidya means the ignorance and the ignorant pursuit of sense
gratification. That is avidya. So, those who live for sense gratification. They
are going to enter into darkness. And then:

        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

So, here, "vidyāyām ratāḥ", this is not knowledge, real knowledge in terms of
vidya, but so called knowledge. It is the knowledge that promotes sense
gratification. So, so..., those people, who with knowledge engage in sense
gratification, they usually commit far greater sinful activities. And that is
how they go deeper into darkness. So, here, avidya is ignorant pursuit of sense
gratification. And vidya is pursuit of sense gratification with knowledge. So,
then, then tenth mantra says:

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, it is saying that one result is obtained by the pursuit of a..., a...,
avidya, and another result is obtained by the pursuit of vidya. So, what does it
here avidya and vidya do not mean the same thing? Although, the terms are the
same. Here, it is basically referring to material life and spiritual life. So,
that:

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-

So, what was called avidya and vidya in the first mantra? Both of them are
clapped together as avidya over here. So, here, especially, it refers to the
vidya, but essentially, pursuit of sense gratification is avidya, whether one
is doing it with in ignorance or with knowledge. So, what this mantra means is
that by pursuing sense gratification one result is obtained that is classified
as worshiping avidya. And another result is obtained by pursuing spiritual life,
ultimately Krishna Consciousness. So, here, vidya refers to the pursuit of
spiritual knowledge, the pursuit of spiritual goals. Avidya refers to material
knowledge and the pursuit of material pleasures. And then in the last mantra, it
says that:

        vidyāṁ cāvidyāṁ ca yas
        tad vedobhayaṁ saha
        avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
        vidyayāmṛtam aśnute

So, it says that with vidya and avidya, one can attain fearlessness and go
beyond the cycle of birth and death. "avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā", by avidya, one
will go beyond "mṛtyuṁ", and "vidyayāmṛtam aśnute", by avidya, one will attain
amra-tattva, "āmṛta", eternality. So, what does this here refer to? Here, avi..,
the same words again with avidya and vi..., vidya, vidya are used, but here,
avidya refers to the knowledge for bodily maintenance. That means here, avidya
refers to the basic knowledge by which, how we have to keep ourselves healthy,
how we have to e..., earn a livelihood, how we have to maintain basic family
stability, and social harmony at a basic level. We cannot become happy in this
world, but we have to live harmoniously in this world without too much
disruptions. The knowledge for bodily maintenance here is called as avidya. So,
that avidya is required if one is to practice spiritual life. And then, so,
"avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā", one will be able to navigate through this ocean of
material existence, if one has some knowledge of the ocean. You know, how the
waves can become too much. How the waves are,  become too less. But ultimately,
one has to go to the destination of eternity. That is the only way out of the
ocean. So, that destination, eternity will be attained by the practice of
spiritual life. Also, that is why vidya here refers to the knowledge of pursuit
of Krishna Consciousness.

So, to repeat here, so what is called as avidya and vidya in nine ver...? So,
that means basically common denominator is pursuing sense gratification in both
of them, in ninth mantra. And tenth mantra, both avidya and vidya from ninth
mantra is called as avidya. Because in both cases there is pursuit of sense
gratification. And, in the tenth and ma..., eleventh mantras, the meaning of
vidya remains the same. It is knowledge for the pursuit of Krishna
Consciousness. But the meaning of avidya changes from ten to eleven again. Ten
to eleven, it is, the change is that, eleven, it is not knowledge for pursuing
sense gratification. It is knowledge for bodily maintenance. So, we will look at
this table once again if it is little confusing right now. You, when we go over
the mantras, things will become more clear. But the main point I want to make
over here is that we cannot understand scripture just by knowing words. There is
text. And there is context. And unless we have a whole picture of the context,
just the text is not enough to comprehend things. By the texts, we will, we may
use a dictionary, and by the dictionary, we may get some basic understanding.
But we cannot get complete understanding just by dictionary alone. To get a
complete understanding, we need to have a, a broader understanding of the
context.

So, what vidya means, what avidya means, one has to carefully study and then
understand. So, the Upanishad especially, because they use words that are
multivalent. The words can have different meanings in different contexts. That
is why they are even more difficult to understand than the other books in the
Vedic library. So, the Upanishads are for the jnanis, and this is the kind of 
speculation that jnanis like to do. Why is this statement and this statement
contradictory over here? Why is this and this over here like this? And they are
trying to figure out, and come up with their own explanations. But actually, if
you want the real explanation, we have to come through guru saddhu sastra.
Because they are, the guru saddhu sastra parampara goes directly to Krishna.
And, it, it is not just historically going towards Krishna. It is also
internally going towards Krishna because the great acharyas are connected with
Krishna in their heart. And that is how:

        dadami buddhi-yogam tam
        
Krishna gives them the intelligence to understand things in a proper way. So,
now, let us move to the mantra:

        andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti
        ye 'vidyām upāsate
        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u vidyāyām ratāḥ

So, "andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti", they will enter to the darkness of ignorance.
Who? "ye 'vidyām upāsate", those who worship avidya.

And "tato bhūya iva te tamo", that even "tato bhūya", again, even more, "iva
te", even greater "tamo", greater the "atmana" will be for those who "ya u
vidyāyām ratāḥ", so here "vidyāyām ratāḥ" means those who are absorbed in
knowledge. But actually, this knowledge is not spiritual knowledge. It is so
called knowledge. Those who are in so called knowledge, they will enter into
greater darkness. Let us look at this, translation. So, Prabhupada writes:

"Those who engage in the culture of nescient activities shall enter into the
darkest region of ignorance. Worse still are those engaged in the culture of
so-called knowledge."

The, so, let us look at the purport in terms of its flow. So, Srila Prabhupada
will explain first in the purport, why it is said that vidya is actually worse
than avidya. Normally, we would say vidya is better than avidya. So, we will
explain that in the first paragraph, then, second paragraph to four paragraph
will explain what exactly is avidyam upasate. How can one worship avidya. What
exactly does that mean. Then, he will talk about vidyayam ratah, so those who
are in so called knowledge, what is the so called knowledge? So, halfway through
the fourth paragraph, he starts that. And then he divides this into three
categories. The so called vi..., vidya can be Godless modern education. Then,
there is Veda-vada-ratah, there are those who study the Vedas, but they think
the Vedas are meant only to give us material knowledge, and they focus on that
material knowledge coming from the Vedas without looking at its, the spiritual
side. And mayayapahrita jnanah are those people who have knowledge, but maya has
stolen away their knowledge. These are the mayavadis. Those who claim to be God.
So, it is, this Srila Prabhupada will elaborate later also about Mayavadis, but
these are the three kinds of ca..., broad categories of people who have
knowledge, but they attain actually a destination, their knowledge does not give
them an auspicious destination. So, they are the Godless materialists. They are
the irreligious materialists, the gross materialists. Then they are the
religious materialists. And then they are the monists. Monists are those who say
everything is one. These are the mayavadis. So, let us look at these sections
now. So, why vidya is worse than avidya? So, Srila Prabhupada writes:

"Modern civilization has advanced considerably in the field of mass education"

So, where credit is due, we can due credit. 12:03
