Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x96rcpyh2wo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=fxKm68pml19d8PH955L303jKG498MTU0MDEwMjc1MEAxNTQwMDE2MzUw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_022_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=x96rcpyh2wo&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Today, we come to the conclusion of the Isopanisad study. We will discuss the
eighteenth mantra. And before that, we will just have a quick overview of the
Isopanisad to see how we have traced the journey. And then we will recap this at
the end again.

So, let us look at the Isopanisad. Basically, it has five broad sections. In the
first section, the message is we should live in harmony with the Ishvara. In
the second section, we are told that we have to develop spiritual vision to
dev..., to understand that Ishvara. And then the subsequent is explaining how to
develop that spiritual vision. First is, we have to have the right vidya. Then,
we have to do right upasana. And then, we have to do the right yachna, the last
four mantras are prayers. So, in this last section, the first two mantras were
more or less. First mantra was clearly please take me from the impersonal
effulgence to the personal Lord, personal Supreme. And then after that were
prayers asking for the removal of the obstacles of the devotional path. So, the
last mantra is also a similar prayer.

        agne naya supathā rāye asmān
        viśvāni deva vayunāni vidvān
        yuyodhy asmaj juhurāṇam eno
        bhūyiṣṭhāṁ te nama-uktiṁ vidhema

So, the Lord is glorified with various appetites, "agne". So, you are, oh Lord,
are as powerful as fire. He says, fire can burn everything. You can burn all the
impurities within my heart. "naya" means to take me, kindly lead me, "naya".
"supathā", "pathā" is path. "supathā" is the right path. "agne naya supathā".
"rāye asmān", so all of us. So, it is not a pra..., prayer just for myself. It
is a prayer on behalf of all living beings. Please take me to You, path for
reaching You.

"viśvāni deva vayunāni vidvān", all of us, "vayunāni vidvān", you are aware of
all my actions, oh Lord. "yuyodhy asmaj juhurāṇam eno", so, in, all these
obstacles that are there, "yodhy", please remove them, all hindrances,
"juhurāṇam". "bhūyiṣṭhāṁ te nama-uktiṁ vidhema". "bhūyiṣṭhāṁ" means again and
again in front of you. "nama-uktiṁ", I offer words of obeisances to you.

So, the paraphrase is: Oh, Lord, you are like fire, you know all my actions,
please kindly lead me on the right path, whatever obstacles are there, please
remove them. I offer my obeisances to you. Let us look at Srila Prabhupada's
translation.

"O my Lord, as powerful as fire, O omnipotent one, now I offer You all
obeisances,"

Prabhupada say, "nama-uktiṁ vidhema", "bhūyiṣṭhāṁ", Prabhupada translates as all
obeisances.

"... falling on the ground at Your feet. O my Lord, please lead me on the
right path to reach You, and since You know all that I have done in the past,
please free me from the reactions to my past sins so that there will be no
hindrance to my progress."

So, it is a prayer not just for maintenance of oneself in this world. Most
people feel that the purpose of God's existence is to help me in this world.
Which is true. God is ready to help us in this world also. But ultimately, God
wants to take us out of this world, back to Him. So, many prayers are, God
provide me the things that I need here. But here, the prayer is different. It
is, oh God, I want to come back to you. And please remove the obstacles from
this path. So, it is a spiritually evolved prayer. And it is a prayer which is
very much devotional in its mood and content. Let us look at Srila Prabhupada's
purport.

So, in the first paragraph, Srila Prabhupada explains how obstacles on the
spiritual path originate. And then one has to overcome these obstacles and
thereafter achieve perfection. So, for achieving perfection, there is a gradual
way. And there is a quick way. So, Srila Prabhupada outlines both those ways.
And then, after recommending the quick way, Srila Prabhupada explains the, how
that quick way on the devotional ser..., on the path of devotional service is
facilitated by the omnipotence of the Lord, how the omnipotent Lord guides a
devotee. So, let us look at these. Srila Prabhupada writes that, actually:

"The Lord is addressed as fire because He can burn anything into ashes,
including the sins of the surrendered soul."

The, now, when we are practicing spiritual life, our past reactions, they come
upon us to cause us misery. Now, they cause us misery in two ways. One is
external as the problems that we face in our life. We may get sick. We may lose
our job. We may have some problems in society where we are leaving, where we are
living. And we may even have to leave from that place at some time. We may have
to relocate because of certain situations. So, all these are external problems.
Along with that, we all may also get internal problems. Our own lust, anger,
greed, envy, pride, illusion, these may rise up. And they may drag us away from
Krishna. These are also sinful reactions. So, our sinful reactions come f...,
at, there is a physical reaction to sinful actions. And there is a psychological
reaction. The physical reaction often comes as external problems.
Psychological reaction comes as internal problems. Now, we often see the
physical reactions in other, in others' lives. But we do not see the
psychological reactions in their lives unless they become expressed through
physical changes of behavior. And that is why we often feel that I alone am
struggling. You know, I have so many conditionings to fight with. Other devotees
seem to be so happily practicing devotional service. You know, why is devotional
service such a struggle for me alone? It is not for me alone. All of us are in
the same boat. Now, the waves of conditionings come and hit everybody who is in
the boat. And the boa..., whoever is in that boat will get shaked. Similarly,
the waves of past conditionings hit all of us. We are in the boat of material
existence. We all have a material mind. And all of us will be affected. But
often, the passions and thoughts that go on in the mind, are not expressed until
one actually is enabled to control them. That means they get expressed
physically and then they come out. So, then we may see that, of course, we may
have lust, anger, greed inside. And that may be tormenting the person. But when
that is expressed, that may seem, we may call that as a slip or fall. A slip is
just like when a person is walking. Then, there is a slight slip. So, slip, the
person is almost like falling. But then, person restores the balance. Or a fall
means, that person just completely sprawls on the ground. Person falls. So, like
that, we may all have slips and falls in our spiritual life. When there are
slips and falls, these are because of the past conditionings taking control. Or
rather, we letting the past conditionings take control. No one can blame the
past conditionings for the present fall. Why is that? Because blaming the past
conditionings for a fall is like blaming gravity for the sinking of a ship. If a
ship or a boat sinks in an ocean, is gravity responsible for the sinking? We can
say yes. But gravity is there for every, all the boats that are going in the
ocean. Now, it is not that gravity has some vendor, targets a particular boat.
And gravity causes sinking of that boat alone. No. Gravity is there for all
boats. It is pulling all the boats down. But if the boat is managed carefully,
then the boat will not sink. So, gravity, we could say, is responsible for
sinking of a boat. But gravity is the ultimate cause. There is an immediate
cause. There is a, gravity is a common cause that is there for everyone, not the
ultimate cause. Ultimately, the ultimate cause for everything is Krishna.

So, it is not that K..., Krishna causes the falling of anyone. It is there are
laws of material nature. And if we do not follow the laws, or we do not do the
necessary things to protect ourselves from the laws, then we will fall, you
know. So, if there is a hole in the boat, and then because of that, water comes
and the boat sinks. We cannot blame gravity for the sinking of the sh..., boat.
Who has to be blamed? The person who caused the hole. Or the person who let the
boat stay. So, similarly, we can never blame our conditionings for our faults.
The process of devotional service is like a boat. And we are in the material
ocean. And in the material ocean, we will be dragged down by our conditionings.
But once we are situated in the boat of devotional service, then in that boat,
we are safe. In that boat, we are safe. In the Bhagavad Gita says that the boat
of transcendental knowledge is so potent, so wonderful that no matter how sinful
a person may be, in that person can cross over the ocean. And He says that:

    api ced asi pāpebhyaḥ
    sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛt-tamaḥ
    sarvaṁ jñāna-plavenaiva
    vṛjinaṁ santariṣyasi

So, in 4.36, Krishna says, "api ced asi pāpebhyaḥ", no matter how sinful a
person may be. "sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛt-tamaḥ", even that person is the most sinful
of all sinners. "sarvaṁ jñāna-plavenaiva", that person is just situated himself
in the "plav". "plave", "plave" is boat of knowledge. The spiritual knowledge
culminates in devtional service. C..., spiritual knowledge is, the best of
spiritual knowledge, the "rāja-vidyā", as Krishna tells in 9.2. So, once that
person is situated in the mode of transcendental knowledge, then "vṛjinaṁ
santariṣyasi", one will be able to cross over the ocean of miseries, the ocean
of material existence, which is filled with miseries. So, the boat is competent
enough to take us across. And once we are in the boat, gravity cannot pull us
down unless we make a messwhile we are in the boat. If we jump out of the boat.
Or we make a hole in the boat. Or we start shaking the boat, we do not, we do
not carefully navigate the boat. There are various ways. One is that I just jump
out of the boat. Another is that I create a hole in the boat. Another is in the
way that by the ocean, the ocean, when a giant wave is coming, and instead of
navigating carefully, I just take the boat into a storm. And then the waves just
zo...., it just overturns the boat. So, what are we referring to in these
situations? You know, first is, we just give up the process of devotional
service and go away. That is like jumping out of the boat. An..., we just, then,
we fall back into the ocean. We try, you know. The other is that, while
practicing devotional service we privately secretly keep indulging in sinful
activities. That is like creating holes in the boat. And we go right into a
storm. That is like going into a tempting situation, even when we know, we are
practicing devotional service, but within the, such a purview of practicing
devotional service, we still go into tempting situations, which we know are
dangerous for us. So, you know, then, what happens is, although you are
practicing devotional service, the boat is strong. But we may not, you know,
just because the boat is strong, does not mean that we can go into a storm and
still survive. Actually, we have to be intelligent. If the storm comes of its
own accord, and we have to take shelter of Krishna. And He will protect us. But
if we ourselves go into a storm. That means we carelessly go into a tempting
situation, where we know that we are likely to be provoked, then it is quite
likely that we will fall off. You know, that the boat will overturn and we will
fall back. So, in all these situations, gravity cannot be blamed. It is we who,
who need to take the responsibility.
     
Therefore, the important point is that we have a process that can protect us.
And the obstacles will come because of our past sinful reactions. When these
obstacles come, at that time, how do we deal with them? We deal with them by
taking greater shelter of Krishna. So, we are not alone in the boat. Krishna is
there in the form of the spiritual master. And the spiritual master is there
through his other representatives also. There is Guru, Sadhu, Shastra. So, when
the storm starts coming. You know, at that time, we have to take shelter of
Guru, Sadhu, Shastra, pray to Krishna, connect with the Caitya-guru within, the
Supersoul. And learn how to deal with the situation. Otherwise, we will be
overcome by the conditionings. But when we are overcome, it is not that we are
just passive victims. You know, we are also responsible. Because those
conditionings cannot overcome us unless we consent. Actually, when the mind
pro..., prevents temptations, the mind can only propose. It cannot impose. Mind
can say do this, do that, do this, do that. But ultimately, it is we who choose
to do that. So, the ultimate bli..., responsibility is ours. Now, Srila
Prabhupda explains in the purport that actually, when we do this kind of
vikarma, so Srila, this last sentence in the purports, first paragraph:

"Such vikarma is enacted by the illusioned living entity simply for sense
gratification, and thus such activities become hindrances on the path of
self-realization."

Hindrances, they obstruct us. They are just like the waves, the holes. The waves
in the ocean. The holes in the boat. They all obstruct the boat moving forward.
Now, Srila Prabhupada explains that, now, how does one overcome all this? There
are two ways. One is the gradual way. And one is the rapid way. So, what is the
gradual way? Gradual way is that, that one takes, one starts cultivating
brahmanical cultural. So, one is born in the society, where there is overall
spiritual orientation. And one starts developing good qualities. So, Srila
Prabhupada here is talking about the process of gradual purification. Which he
will elaborate in the first man..., verse of Nectar of Instruction also, which
we will discuss in our future classes. Essentially the gradual process involves
cul..., striving vigo..., vigorously to cultivate various qualities. Prabhupada
taught, talks about:

        tapasā brahmacaryeṇa
         śamena ca damena ca
        tyāgena satya-śaucābhyāṁ
         yamena niyamena vā

So, it is a long list. So, one practices tapasā. One does brahmacarya. One
follows rules. One keeps cleanliness. And by all these, one tries to become
purified. This is important. But this is the gradual way. So, however, this
gradual way is difficult. Because it may take a long long time. The quick way is
to take shelter of Krishna, is to connect with a spiritual master and with the
help of the spiritual master, learn the process of devotional service. So, once
we learnt the process of devotional service, then, by the mercy of Krishna, we
will become purified much faster than by our own efforts to cultivate good
qualities. So, the Bhagavatam gives the example that trying to remove material
desires and material contaminations from our consciousness, is like trying to
remove fog. You know, fog is all around. And fog makes it very difficult for us
to see. But then what do we do with the fog? Ph, ph, ph. We cannot just blow
air at the fog. We cannot catch the fog and try to throw it aside. You know,
even if I take a torch, flashlight, and try to see through the fog, we will be
able to see a little distance. But if the Sun rises, then what happens is, the
fog just disappears. So, similarly:

        aghaṁ dhunvanti kārtsnyena
         nīhāram iva bhāskaraḥ

It describes that when we develop devotion to Lord Vishnu, and chant His holy
names, that time, "aghaṁ dhunvanti kārtsnyena". "aghaṁ" is sins. "aghasura" was
a sinful demon. So, "aghaṁ dhunvanti", they all become cleansed. "kārtsnyena",
completely. "nīhāram iva bhāskaraḥ", just as fog is removed by the rising of the
"bhāskaraḥ". So, the quick way is to invoke the presence of the Lord in our
heart. The, the long, gradual way is that we consciously try to cultivate good
qualities. The quick way is we rapidly try to invoke the presence of the Lord in
our heart. And either way, the goal is to become purified. The goal is to
manifest the godliness within. But the quicker way, because it depe..., it
relies more on the strength of the Lord and not just on our own srength, it is
easier. It is more effective. You know, what all this, this involve? Let us look
at it now. So, Srila Prabhupada talks about how a person may fall in one's
spiritual life, if one is not careful. Let us look at this. This is an important
point to understand. So, there is, there are three trajectories that we can see
in this at one time. So, if one practices akarma, that is devotional service,
that by akarma, one can have rapid elevation. By practicing devotional service
by the mercy of Krishna, it is like an elevator, which takes us f..., up
swiftly. In contr..., in contrast, another way is the path of karma. Here, karma
means karma-kanda. So, karma-kanda gradually purifies us. We follow the rules
and regulations. And by that, we go to heavens. It is a slow way up. It takes a
long long time to eventually become liberated.

        bahūnāṁ janmanām ante
        
That is also one way for elevation. Now, apa..., apart from that, there is
vikarma. Vikarma is sinful activity. And vikarma takes us down. So:

        adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

Krishna describes in the fourteenth chapter that by practicing vikarma, one
becomes degraded, and one goes to the lower direction, lower species, lower
planets, like that. So, now, among these, today, if we see, most people are
engaged in vikarma. You know, we often use the word "karmis" to refer to
materialistic non-devotees. You know, the word "karmi" has a very negative
connotation within devotee circles, s..., currently. But actually, the word
"karmi" in the Vedic context is a positive connotation. It is a karma-kandi.
Today, materialistic people are not "karmis". They are all actually "vikarmis".
So, of course, we should not talk in a negative way towards anyone. We, our goal
is not to laugh at people. Our goal is to laugh with people. Laugh at people
means, we are thinking, I am so superior. You are so fallen. Hahahaha. Not
laugh at people. Laugh with people means we elevate them and bring them to
Krishna Consciousness. And then we chant, and dance, and kirtan, and we laugh
with them. Not that laugh with people means we go down to their level. And
we do sinful activities with them and laugh with them. Not that. But our goal is
we should not be contemned full of anyone. If we are morally in a, and
spiritually in a better situation than others, that is because Krishna has given
us His mercy. It is not that we deserved anything. It is Krishna causelessly
gives His mercy to us. You know, if devotees had been the way we are, 21:07
