Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cMLn6axaH6g
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_009_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=KHVRo7yZx4V-NyM_TABRmqib4Dl8MTU0MDEwMjMwM0AxNTQwMDE1OTAz&v=cMLn6axaH6g&event=video_description

...course. Today, we will discuss mantra seven. Yesterday, we discussed mantra
six, which talked about equal vision. So let us look at this section first and
then we will go into the mantra. So this is the second section of the Isopanisad
which is talking about understand ishvara by spiritual vision. So in that,
mantras four and five, first talking about how through our normal vision and
normal level of consciousness, ishvara is inconceivable.

And then, before we can understand Ishvara, we need to develop spiritual vision
towards the things, people and events of this world. So, that is the second
section, six, seven, and with this spiritual vision, then we will be able to
apply spiritual vision towards the Supreme Lord. So, this is the last part,
seventh verse of the second subsection within the second section of the
Isopanisad. So let us look at the verse:

        yasmin sarvāṇi bhūtāny
        ātmaivābhūd vijānataḥ
        tatra ko mohaḥ kaḥ śoka
        ekatvam anupaśyataḥ

"yasmin", that person, so this is a continuation of the thread of thoughts from
the previous verse. "yasmin", that person was mentioned in the last verse also.
"sarvāṇi bhūtāny", all living beings, "ātmaivābhūd vijānataḥ", "vijānataḥ" means
to know, know systematically, especially, visesa, vi is the prefix "vijānataḥ",
how does the person know all living beings? "ātmaivābhūd", one sees them at a
spiritual platform, one sees all living beings as spiritual. Now, "tatra ko
mohaḥ kaḥ śoka", for such a person, what is the mohah? What is the soka? What is
the illusion? What is the lamentation? Why there is no, no mohah, lamentation,
because "ekatvam anupaśyataḥ", such a person sees oneness and "anupaśyataḥ", we
discussed the word "anupaśyataḥ" was there in the previous verse also.

        yas tu sarvāṇi bhūtāny
        ātmany evānupaśyati
        sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ
        tato na vijugupsate

So, "ātmany evānupaśyati", so in both these mantras, the emphasize is on seeing
with knowledge, "anupaśyataḥ". So let us look at the translation:

"One who always sees all living entities as spiritual sparks", "ātmaivābhūd",
now Srila Prabhupada explains what that "ātmaivābhūd", not only the purport, but
also in translation... in quality one with the Lord, becomes a true knower of
things. What, then, can be illusion or anxiety for him? "tatra ko mohaḥ kaḥ
śoka".

Now, the purport in, we divided into five distinct sections with the... The
whole purport is basically an elaboration on ekatvam. Because the word ekatvam
is like a feast for the impersonalist. And the Upanishads are generally
considered to be books that talk about impersonalism. And that is why
the impersonalists use them a lot, however, the Upanishads also talk about
personal features of the Absolute Truth, although they are not the emphasize,
they are talked about.

So, Srila Prabhupada is elaborating on the concept of ekatvam, based on the
broader understanding of the Vedic scriptures. Because here just the word
ekatvam comes, oneness. But what does oneness mean actually?

So, Srila Prabhupada will explain this, firstly, he talks about energy and
energetic, and he uses the example of fire, and heat and light. Then, he uses
that oneness, the energy and energetic are one, but entirely different also.
What is the difference? With respect to drop and ocean. The drop is one in
quality, but is different in quantity.

And then Srila Prabhupada uses the example of how the oneness is actually not
just in quality, but is also in interest. It is inclinations and desires, and
intentions. So he uses the example of family. Every member in the family is
different, but all of them are united in their interest. And in a country, every
citizen is individual, but at the same time, the nation is united as one
cohesive whole. So like that, oneness and interest. Now, when the family is
united together, then the family will be happy. But if every individual wants to
pursue his or her own interest and does not care for others, then the family
will be chaotic.

So, Prabhupada says, similarly, in the spiritual realm also, when everbody
becomes one in interest, then there is enjoyment. And then, that is the point
elaborated in the next paragraph. That is separate interests cause shoka and
moha because lamentation and illusion. And therefore the conclusion is that we
should become one in interest with God. We should do, make the will of God as
our own will.

Now, let us look at these themes one by one.

So, complete realisation of ekatvam has two aspects. First is that we realise
our oneness with the Absolute Truth in quality. Now, when that happens, it
brings detachment. Why? Because when I understand that I am not jarda tattva,
I am not matter, I am citkana, I am spirit, I am conscious beings, then I
understand that the dead matter cannot give me happiness, and temporary things
will only cause me misery because I am eternal. So, when I understand that I am
different from matter, because I am in quality one with the Absolute, aham
brahmasmi, at that time, I become detached from matter. Because now I
understand that matter cannot give me happiness because matter is unconscious,
matter is temporary. I am conscious. I am eternal. I should seek happiness at
the spiritual level, so therefore, realising that I am spiritual, I am in one
quality with the Absolute Truth is desirable, but it is not the complete
realisation.

One subordination in quantity to the Absolute Truth brings humility. So, if I
just think that I am spirit, that will bring pride, especially when I consider
that, oh, all the other people are attached, I am detached, that can bring
pride. But when I understand, yes, I am spirit, but there is a Supreme Spirit.
And I am tiny. I am amsa of that spirit. So subordination in quantity to the
Absolute Truth brings humility.

So, on the impersonal path, the oneness in quality is emphasized that aham
brahmasmi, aham brahmasmi, aham brahmasmi, whereas on the path of devotion, the
subordination in quantity is emphasized. Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Sanatan
Goswami "jivere swarup hoy, krishnera nitya das", that we are the servants of
Krishna is the primary emphasis of the devotees. The devotees also know that we
are not the body, we are the soul. But the soul is not just some formless
spirit. The soul has a real living relationship with the Absolute Truth, and
that relationship is based on love and service. So when we understand that God
is great and I am small, and my smallness is not just at the material level,
even at a spiritual level, I am small. That brings humility.

So, detachment and humility, both are important, but if detachment alone comes
first and that is the primary focus, if the exclusive focus, then the detachment
leads to pride. On other hand, if humility comes first, I am not the enjoyer, I
am the servant, and let me serve, then that service gives a higher taste. And
when that higher taste leads to detachment, that detachment does not bring
pride, because already, the foundation of humility has been established based on
the knowledge that I am the servant of God. We see in the Siksastakam, Caitanya
Mahaprabhu emphasizes this progression when he says in the third verse humility.

        tṛṇād api sunīcena
        taror api sahiṣṇunā
        amāninā mānadena
        kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

So be humbler than a blade of grass, be more tolerant than a tree. These are
examples of humility in classic sense. So he first recommends humility, exalts
humility, and then he talks about detachment.

        na dhanaḿ na janaḿ na sundarīḿ
        kavitāḿ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye
        mama janmani janmanīśvare
        bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

So, the conclusion of both these verses is advance mean towards devotion. It is
third verse concludes with "kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ", which is advancing towards
the devotion, and fourth concludes with "ahaitukī tvayi".

So, both are talking about progress in devotion, but first humility, then
humility that it brings us closer to Krishna, gives us a higher taste by making
us fixed in our service to Krishna. Then that makes detachment easier. So, the
error of impersonalism is by focusing only on detachment, they become vulnerable
to pride, and the greatest of all pride is, I am God. We will discuss about this
particular aspect of impersonalism, which is called mayavad, later.

But here, our focus is ekatvam, is not in an absolute oneness sense. There are
gradations and there are subtleties over there. Let us look for this ekatvam.

Srila Prabhupada has given the example of fire. So, Jiva Goswami and his
sandharbas analyzes these examples further. So, we know fire and light.
Wherever, fire is there, heat and light will be there. So like that, the fire is
the organic whole, but the fire spreads its influence to heat and light.

Similarly, the Abs... the Supreme Absolute Truth is there, and the Absolute
Truth's influence spreads through heat and light. Now, when we want to talk
about the difference between energy and energetic, for example, yesteday, we
talked about fire illuminates, fire burns, now burning and fire are the
essentially, they are interconnected, but still they are different. Fire burns.
So, if now, in this we do not have the gradation of energies. Its understanding,
although energy and energetic are same, but if there are different distances
between the energies and the energetic, some energies closer, some energies
further, that cannot be understood through the example of fire, and heat or
light.

So Jiva Goswami uses another example to talk about energy and energetic, this
example of son. Now, normally, we use the example of son to talk about the three
aspects of the Absolute Truth, the brahman, paramatma and bhagavan, so the all
pervading effulgence is the brahmayoti, the localised or the reflection of the
Sun, different ana..., different places, the analogy is given differently, the
orbit of the Sun, the orb of the Sun, there are the, which were reflected in
many places and many reverse. There is the Sun, but its still reflection
expanded. So like that the Supersoul, one Supreme Lord manifests in many places.

And on the Sun planet, when we enter, and we see the Sun God, there there is
Bhagavan. So that is a normal example that we give. Here the Jiva Goswami is
giving the example not to explain the three aspects of the Absolute Truth, but
he is explaining the various energies of the Absolute Truth. So, let us look at
this example. When we took at the Sun, the Sun God is Krishna. So, now, the Sun
God is a predominating deity of the Sun, and from there onwards, there is
radiance around its orbs. That means the Sun is there, and the effulgence that
comes out, all around. This is very intense which is very close to it. That is
the svarupa shakti.

So, we know that there are, Krishna has three energies: antaranga shakti,
bahiranga shakti, and tatastha shakti. So, internal energy, external energy, and
marginal energy. So, internal energy is spiritual, the external energy is
material, and the marginal energy is also spiritual. All of us souls are the
marginal energy. But we can go towards the bahiranga or antaranga, because our
position is variable, so we are called as marginal energy.

So, now, Jiva Goswami is using the example of Sun to explain these three
energies and their relationship with the Absolute Truth. So that the Sun is
there, the effulgence around the Sun, just close around, not its distant Sun
rays that are going all around. Just around the Sun, there is a blazing
effulgence. That is the Svarupa Shakti.

And then the rays that shoot out from the Sun, and go far away, they are also
coming from the Sun, but they are spreading far. That is the tatastha shakti.

And then, the Sun may be reflected in a river or in a pot, and that is the
bahiranga shakti.

So here, the point of the example is that, although all these three, the
radiance around the Sun, the rays of the Sun, and the reflection, these all
three are, radiance, rays, reflection, all three are coming from the Sun. In
that sense, all three are the energies of the Sun. Although, all three are the
energies, all three do not manifest the Sun's power in the same degree. The
radiance is much much closer to the Sun, whereas the reflection is further away,
and the heat of the Sun, the blaze of the Sun will not be manifested in the
reflection.

So like that, the antaranga shakti is conscious. So the Supreme Consciousness of
the Supreme Absolute Truth is also manifested in antaranga shakti. The Sun ray
also has the heat and the illuminating capacity of the Sun, but that is less.
And as he Sun ray keeps going further and further and further away, then what
will happen is, eventually, it will become cold, and old, and it will perish.

So the potency of the atma to act spiritually becomes lesser and lesser when the
atma becomes more and more distant from the soul. So, that is the tatastha
shakti. Tatastha shakti is coming from the Supreme Lord, but it has a tendency
to go away, and the further it goes away, the more it becomes into material
influence, the less it shows its spiritual.

Now, the reflection in the water of the Sun is also coming from the Sun, but
actually, neither the heat, nor the illuminating capacity of the Sun will be
manifested through the reflection. So therefore here, the jeda tattva, the
matter is talked about. Now, matter also comes from the Absolute Truth, matter
is also energy of the Absolute Truth. Matter does not exhibit consciousness.
Matter is not eternal.

So in this way, the Lord is the source of all energies, yet there are gradations
in His energies. So here, the point is that not only are the energies
non-different from the Lord, but they are also different, not only are they
different from the Lord in one sense, but they are also different internally, 
there are different kindness of energies. So this acintya beda abeda is a very
profound concept, which explains the relationship of the Lord with the Absolute,
or with the world, with various components of the world, with the souls also.

So this is the nature of the Lord and his energies, so again, what are we
talking about over here? Exploring the concept ekatvam. So, there is oneness
because everything ultimately is dependent on the Sun, but still, within the
oneness, there is variety.

So, see the full picture of oneness. Oneness, many people, nowadays, it is a
popular slogan, unity in diversity. Just there, for example, there may be a
nation which has many people from different races, different religions,
different languages, different cultures, and they say, we should all be
united. We want national integration. So unity in diversity is a popular phrase.

And there is importance to unity in diversity, but at the same time, in the
spiritual reality, there is not just unity in diversity, there is also diversity
in unity. What does that mean? That actually, there is material variety, so
there is male, there is female, there is brahmana, there is sudra, there is
wealthy, there is poor, now all this variety is there at the material level. But
beyond that there is unity. Unity is that all of them are souls, and as souls,
all of them are equal. So, from the variety of this world, we come to the unity.
So this is the first step in spiritual realisation. However, beyond that unity,
there is diversity also. What is the diversity? That all those souls, they are
all souls, none of them are whatever their material bodies presently are. But as
souls, they are not entirely just xerox copies of each other, clones of each
other.

Every soul is an individual, and every soul is individually unique, and every
soul has a unique relationship with Krishna. So at the spiritual level, they are
all distinct. So now what is the unity if they are all distinct? They all love
Krishna. They all serve Krishna. And they delight in loving and serving Krishna.
So there is diversity in unity also. So bhakti takes us beyond unity in
diversity to diversity in unity. Let us understand this further.

Prabhupada uses the example of the rasa dance, in this particular purport. And
what is the principle of the rasa dance? All the gopis were united in the sense
that when Krishna called with His flute, all the gopis came to Krishna. They
were united in their love for Krishna. At the same time, every gopi is uniquely
individual and her love for Krishna is uniquely individual. In Krishna's
relationships, every gopi adds a special flavor that is not, that would not be
there if she had not been there. So, Krishna is rasa raja. He is the Lord of
all rasas, and he enjoys rasas in relationship with each gopi. So each gopi has
her own flavor of relationship. So now, for example, in the Tenth Canto, the
chapters 29 to 33 are called as the Rasa Panchadhyay, and they are considered to
be the climax of the Srimad Bhagavatam.

Actually, the Tenth Canto is the face of the Supreme Lord, and the Rasa
Panchadhyay is like the beautiful smile of the Supreme Lord. So, if the Rasa
Panchadgyay is like the smile, within that, the 31st chapter, which is the
gopis' prayers of separation, they are the most intense in their devotional
fervor. And those prayers are started by Sukadeva Goswami with a generic
describer, "sri gopya ucuhu". So uvaca is singular, ucuhu is plural. So, "sri
gopya ucuhu", so the gopis said. So now, is it that when all those prayers are
described, one of those prayers, the famous "tavakha tamrita tapta jivanam",
this is a very famous prayer which talks about how the devotees glorify the
Supreme Lord and they extinguish the blazing fire of material existence.

So, when the gopis are singing these prayers, starting form "jayati te 'dhikam
janmana vrajah". So like that, they recite various prayers. So are all the gopis
actually collectively singing these prayers? Have they all thought of it? Have
they done some rehearsal of all these prayers so that they can all recite in
chorus? No, actually speaking, Jiva Goswami in Gopala-campu, analyses each
prayer, and he describes, based on the knowledge, on the mentality, on the
attitude, the heart of each devotee, he says, this prayer is said by Lita Devi,
this prayer is said Vishaka Devi, this prayer is said by Radharani, this prayer
is said by Campaklata. So he describes that.

But the point is Sukadeva Goswami is describing all 
