Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=06T-lgvxO5A
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=06T-lgvxO5A&redir_token=NozFcFtUmOlw7tHWZNzuiZpW8j98MTU0MDEwMjQ1MUAxNTQwMDE2MDUx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_013_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_11_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the Isopanisad course.

Today, we will do the tenth, eleventh verse now. So, yesterday, we completed
tenth. Let us have a quick overview of nine, ten, eleven, to see what is
happening. So, I have put a paraphrase trans..., simplified translation of these
verses over here. Avidya takes to darkness, and vidya to greater darkness. That
is ninth. Then tenth is vidya gives one result. And avidya gives another result.
And now, eleventh will say vidya and avidya together grant immortality. Now,
wha..., what does this mean exactly? Here, if you see, first, if we just look
at, vi..., v..., avidya and vidya, straightforward way, then it will seem very
confusing, even contradictory. So, we discussed how avidya and vidya mean
different things. Let us look at that once again. And then we will understand
what vidya and avidya mean, and the eleventh verse that we are going to study
today.

So, so, in the ninth mantra, avidya means ignorant pursuit of sense
gratification. A person does not know what any higher values of life, that is
why the person chases after sense gratification. There, vidya refers to it, so
called vidya. It refers to having knowledge and using one, that knowledge to
pursue sense gratification. So, that will take up a, it will make a person do
more damage because the intelligence will be used to create suffering, in a more
sophisticated way for oneself, through greater pursuit of sense gratification.
Now, in the tenth mantra, avidya refers to both, what was referred to in ninth.
It refers to knowledge for pursuing sense gra..., sense gratification. That
means it includes, both the ignorant pursuit and the knowledge of pur...,
pursuit with knowledge. Both are included in sense gratification. And vidya
refers to knowledge for pursuit of Krishna Consciousness. So, one result is
obtained by this and another by this. Now, in eleventh mantra, avidya refers to
not knowledge for the pursuit of sense gratification, but knowledge for bodily
maintenance. And here, vidya refers to knowledge for the pursuit of Krishna
Consciousness. So, let us look mantra:

        vidyāṁ cāvidyāṁ ca yas
        tad vedobhayaṁ saha
        avidyayā mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
        vidyayāmṛtam aśnute

So, "vidyā" and "avidya", "yas tad vedobhayaṁ saha", so, "veda" means to know.
"ubhayam" means both. So, when 02:45
