Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fkIOAxT66dI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=fkIOAxT66dI&redir_token=8BaVNZUG5PS3qypJcqH8IgkqQop8MTU0MDEwMjU5MkAxNTQwMDE2MTky&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_017_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_13_part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Isopanisad course. We are discussing the thirteenth mantra
purport. So, today, I will focus on one theme from this thirteenth mantra
purport. Which we have not discussed until now in a systematic way. Although, we
have discussed it in an overview way. So, here are we, the topic that we will be
discussing is that like people who do not excl..., accept Krishna as sambhavat,
for them, they say that people are my God. So, people are my God.

This was when Srila Prabhupada had come to India with his western disciples. At
that time, there was a famous politician. He had said that people are my God.
And at one level, that had given a lot of popularity. Because the idea that I am
the servant of the people. And he just says some people worship God. I will
worship the general people. That had attracted a lot of public appreciation. But
Srila Prabhupada excoriated that person. He said that we cannot make people into
God. God is God. And people are not God. So, this idea is quite deep rooted that
serving people is service to God. So, today, we will explore it, first from a
sociological perspective. Then from a philosophical perspective. And then from a
practical perspective. Where we integrate the philosophical analysis with the
sociological analysis. So, this is actually a separate representation that I
give on manava seva, madhava seva. And because this topic is important, not just
from the point of view of this purport, or this book. But it is important in
terms of how we present Krishna Consciousness in the world. And how we ourselves
understand Krishna C..., the importance of Krishna Consciousness in our lives.
We will discuss this topic in detail. So, this is manava sevahi, madhava sevahi.
So, is manava seva not madhava seva? That is what we will try to discuss here.
So, this is the overview. So, Prabhupada had prepared long ago.

So, let the facts speak. We will discuss what the facts are. Then, we will look
at Greed causes starvation. How can greed be removed. The secret of compassion.
Are good enough, good intentions good enough?

So, now, why do people think that manava seva is madhava seva? So, manava seva
means service to human beings. Madhava seva is service to God. So, people say
that service to man is service God. Or in today's gender neutral vocabulary,
service to humanity is service to God. Now, this seems to be very popular idea.
But if we look at it objectively, what is the reality? At first glance, many
movies talk about this. Many social critics talk about this. They say that you
people are spending so much money inside the temples. Now, they are, on the
stones in the temples. And outside, there are poor beggars who are starving. Why
don't you use that same money to feed the poor people? So, certainly, poor
people should be fed. No doubt. But is it that the money being spent inside is
the cause of the starvation outside? At an immediate superficial level, you
could ju..., we could just say that, oh, instead of spending money, just spend
money here. But beggars are not just starving outside the temples. Beggars are
starving on the, in the slums, on the streets everywhere. Beggars are sta...,
sta..., beggars will be starving outside the houses of the billionaires and
trillionaires also. But quite often, they have security around. And they would
drive the beggars away. So, it is not that beggars are only outside the temple.
And if you are going to look at starvation, why emotionally manipulate people by
contrasting the starvation outside the temple with the opulence with which
deity is worshipped inside? Why not contrast the starvation with the beggars with
the thousands and thousands of dollars that are spent on cricket, on movies, on
so many frivolous events. We have nothing against cricket or movies per say. Of
course, they are mundane. They are passionate. They are distracting from
spiritual life. But the point is, if we compare, comparatively speaking, you
know, spending millions of rupees on just watching one cricket match. In that
much money, how many po..., poor people could have been, you know, served. How
many poor people could have been, you know, fed. How many starving people could
have got so many means. As a matter of perspective, actually, the, the unicef
studies have shown that, all the starving people in the world can be fed, ju...,
if just the money that is spent by the European Union and America on perfumes,
were used for feeding on starving people.

So, who, actually speaking, if you want to contrast, why not contrast this way?
So, that contrast, what does it indicate people? I want to smell God. So that I
can attract others. Even if for my sake of my smelling good, other people have
to starve to death. It does not matter. This contrast is very uncomfortable for
us. Because it interferes with our sense gratification. Whereas when you
contrast, you know, people, b..., starving people outside, the, outside the
temple with the people who are worshipping in the temple inside, what does it
do? It makes us f..., feel, in some way, superior to those who are going to the
temple and worshipping. And it exempts us from the responsibility of going to
the temple and worshipping. So, certainly, the goal is not that people ju...,
in, not justying starving at all. You know, it is the duty of those who are
prosperous to help those who are poor. But to c..., man..., manipulate in this
way the emotions of people against God is misleading, is profoundly misleading.
Not only is it misleading, it does not solve the problem fundamentally. So, let
us look at the facts. As I said here. So, these statistics might be a little
old. Figures might change slightly. But the point remains the same. And is what?

To satisfy the world's sanitation and food requirements would cost only US $13
billion - what the people of the United States and the European Union spend on
perfume each year!

So, actually speaking, we see that this cause of starvation is not so much a,
the, the money that is spent on temple. The money that is spent so much on
frivolous activities. So, when people identify with the body, they want to
decorate the body. When people identify with the mind, they want to titillate
the mind. And for the sake of titillating the mind, they will watch sports. They
will watch movies. They will spend millions, billions on entertainment. So, if
people rose to the spiritual platform. Then, they would not identify so much
with the body or with the mind. And then they would not have to spend so
frivolously and excessively on pandering the body in the mind. And then that
money for also needed the direct service of God. So, it is very superficial and
misleading to say because people are doing madhava seva. People are doing
service to God, that is why people are starving outside. This is misleading
propaganda at the very least. Now, if we look at it deeper, there are several
issues involved. If, if people became God conscious. What all would happen? Now,
if people became God conscious, one aspect of God consciousness would be, they
would see all living beings as the children of God. Many people say that, why do
you, why do you see God only in the temple? Why don't you see God in the beggars
who are all around? You know, fine. We are, we can tell them ok. Wh..., leave
alone seeing God in the beggars outside the temple. Why don't you see God in the
slaughterhouses where all the animals are being slaughtered? You know, is God
not present there with them, in their hearts? If God is everywhere, is He there
only in the human heart? Not in the heart of the animals? He is there
everywhere. Why not see Him there? And actually if people were truly God
conscious instead of just minimising God consciousness in the name of serving
poor people, then the truth God consciousness would reflect the change in their
diet. They would not be non-vegetarian. They would be vegetarian. And if they
became vegetarian, what would happen by that? A lot of difference would happen.
You know, when large percentage, in many countries, more than fifty percent of
the land, that could be used for growing grains for feeding human beings is used
instead to grow further to feed the animals, who are then eaten by human beings.

Now, the problem with this is, it is a very inefficient process. With this much
grains, if human beings eat it, so man, human, human beings fed for a good
amount of time. But that much grain, say, if it is used to feed a, an animal. Then,
that animal, most of it will be eaten, and most of it will be passed out as its
refuse. And a little from this much grain, may be a little bit of, of flesh will be
increased. And then, in that flesh, human beings will eat. So on an average, the
researchers have said that the amount of land that is required to feed one
non-vegetarian person, that could be used to feed so many vegetarian people. So
many, or, it can, that the statistics vary from five to fifteen. But all
statistics agree that the same amount of land can feed many many more vegetarian
people. So, the implication of this is, if we are serious about removing
starvation, become vegetarian. If become, if people become vegetarian, then the
immediate result of that will be so much of the land which is used to feed
animals, can be used to, to grow further to feed animals who are slaughtered,
who are artificially era..., raised, and fattened, and then slaughtered. 10:45
