Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uY5XQVRo75M
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_012_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_10_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=O_Yr8UaJGXwGb4EQvTvIZZJLfKp8MTU0MDEwMjQxNkAxNTQwMDE2MDE2&event=video_description&v=uY5XQVRo75M

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Isopanisad course. We will today discuss mantra ten. So, we are
discussing the third section of the Isopanisad. In this third section, the topic
is vidya. How vidya can lead us to the Absolute Truth. So, in the previous
verse, mantra, we discussed how those who are in ignorance, those who are in
avidya, those who worship avidya going to darkness. And those who continue
to worship avidya, but imagine that they are in vidya. Those who are having so
called knowledge, they are going into deeper ignorance. So, now, this verse will
say that in contrast to both these two people. These two people that means both
of them are basically in avidya, but they think tha..., one of them thinks that
we are in avi..., vidya. So, as contrasted to this avidya, is vidya. And this
ver..., mantra will say that by the cultivation of vidya and the cultivation of
avidya, different results come about. So, let us look at this mantra, mantra
ten:

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, "anyad", "anyad", means, "nyad āhur", "evāhur", it is said, "āhur" is said,
"evā", certainly, "vidyayā-" that by "vidya", "anyad", one, some result comes.

"nyad āhur avidyayā", it is said that by "avidya" another results comes. One
results comes by "vidya", another by "avidya".

"iti śuśruma", thus we have heared "dhīrāṇāṁ", from the great souls.

"ye nas tad vicacakṣire", they have explained this to us. So, here, "vina", so,
so Jango Manu is speaking this to Jagna Avatar, as prayers of invocation. And he
is saying that, I have heard that by the cultivation of knowledge one result
comes about, and by the cultivation of ignorance, another result comes about.
So, let us see Prabhupada's translation.

        "The wise have explained"

That is "dhīrāṇāṁ", "vicacakṣire".

        "... that one result is derived from the culture of knowledge"

"anyad evāhur vidyayā-"

        "... and t at a different result is obtained from the culture of
        nescience."

"nyad āhur avidyayā"

So, basically, the scriptures use different methods, for, in, for conveying
their message. One of the most potent methods that the scriptures uses is
contrasting. Contrasting m..., means if you do this, this will happen. If you do
this, this will happen. Now, you decide what you want to do. So, Krishna uses
this repeatedly in the Bhagavad Gita also. And this makes things very crystal
clear.

        mac-cittah sarva-durgani
        mat-prasadat tarisyasi
        atha cet tvam ahankaran
        na srosyasi vinanksyasi

In 18.58, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says that if you become conscious of me,
you will pass over all obstacles by my grace. If, however, you act out of false
ego, not hearing me. Then, you will be lost. "vinanksyasi". This is constrast
Krishna is doing. So, instructing by const..., contrasting is a very clear and
empathetic way of intrus..., instructing. So, this is what the Isopanisad is
also doing over here. It is contrasting vidya and avidya. Now, in this k..., in
this mantra, avidya refers to, in general, the knowledge o..., the pursuit of
sense gratification. And even knowledge that helps in the pursuit of sense
gratification is called as avidya. And vidya refers to knowledge that helps us
to develop in spiritual understanding, ultimately in Krishna Consciousness. So,
let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport. Vidya leads to desirable qualities.
So, that is the first two paragraphs. In fact, here, Srila Prabhupada lists the
twenty characteristics of knowledge that are given in the Bhagavad Gita,
13.8-12, and then in con..., Srila Prabhupada,  after describing this, contrasts
this with the result of the cultivation of avidya, as is seen in today's
society. Avidya leads to undesirable qualities. And how those undesirable
qualities are seen in today's society? Prabhupada explains.

And then, finally, paragraphs six to nine, he explains only a dhira can teach
vidya. That means, we intellectually think, ok, I, I want vidya. I do not want
avi..., avidya. But actually, from a practical point of view, it is only a
person who is sober, who is not deluded by material things, can actually teach
knowledge, in a systematic way. That is why the word "dhīrāṇāṁ" comes over here.

So, let us go back to the first section. Now, Sri..., here, Srila Prabhupada
lists the eighteen chara..., twenty characteristics of, given in the Bhagavad
Gita, as a list of long eighteen statements. And actually, seeing these eighteen
statements is quite insightful. So, for example, the first qua..., quality over
here is:

        amanitvam adambhitvam
        ahimsa ksantir arjavam

These are the first five qualities, then, 13.8-12 in the Bhagavad Gita, 13.8.
Now, let us see how Srila Prabhupada translates "amanitvam". So, "amanitvam"
means humility or pridelessness. That is how it is there in the Bhagavad Gita.
And now, Srila Prabhupada translates it here as:

"(1) One should become a perfect gentleman and learn to give proper respect to
others."

That means how do I say, how do I know that somebody is humble? Somebody says,
oh, Prabhuji, I am so fallen. Oh, mataji, I am so fallen. I am good for nothing.
I am this. Is that really humility? It may not be. It may be a
self-centeredness masquerading as humility. So, actually, real humility is more
directly expressed by how we respect others. "amanina manadeva". So, "amani",
how much we res..., want respect for ourselves. That is very difficult for us to
e..., deal with, to get rid of, or even to curb. So, but, we can surely start
res..., offering respects to others. And that is a positive way in which we can
cultivate humility because when we are respecting others, we are giving them
thought, attention, and regard. And that essentially is humility. Actually,
pride means we are so filled ourselves that no one else matters. When we start
respecting others, that is a positive, more Krishna Conscious way to develop
humility. Because we think about others and give them thought, attention, time,
and that way we become less self-conscious. So, humility is not so much thinking
low about ourselves. It is more about thinking less about ourselves. You know, I
am not such an important person in the world that I have to think about myself
all the time. I will think about others. You know, think about others. Then that
naturally makes me less filled of myself. And that is how I become humble. So,
learn to give proper respect to others. Then "adambhitvam", Srila Prabhupada
translates as:

"(2) One should not pose himself as a religionist simply for name and fame."

So, "dambh" normally means, so "amanitvam" r..., refers to when I have good
qualities. But still, I do not demand respect. I do not expect respect. That is
"amanitvam". "dambh", now, "dambh", when I do not have qualities, and still, I
ask for respect. That is "dambh". That means I am, I do not know anything about
Bhagavad Gita. I just know one or two verses. And then I say, Bhagavad Gita is
just:

        karmanda vadikar aste ma phale suka dachana

Bhagavad Gita is just work is worship. So, I pretend to have knowledge. So that,
people will respect. No, such a scholarious. So, that is "dambh". And Prabhupada
says here "One should not pose himself as a religionist simply for name and
fame.". So, these are all cha..., characteristics of vidya. So, this is a
remarkable and consistent correlation we will see that Srila Prabhupada brings
about between Isopanisad and Gita Upanishad. So, Bhagavad Gita is also known as
Gita Upanishad. In fact, it is the essence of all the Bhagavad Gitas as the Gita
Mahatmya says.
        
	sarvo panishado gavo
	dogdha gopala nandanah
	partho vatsah sudhir bhokta
	dugdham gita amritam mahat 

So, all the Upanishads are like a cow, and just as the essence of the cow is
the milk, similarly, the essence of all the Upanishads is Bhagavad Gita, the
Gita Upanishad. And just as the milk comes out in the presence of a calf,
"partho" is the calf, and there is a milkman, milkman, a cowherd is required to
bring out the milk, that is Krishna. And when the milk comes, it is not only the
calf who takes it. Other people also take the milk. So, like that, "sudhir".
So, "dhīrāṇāṁ" is the word over here also in this verse. "sudhir" is those who
are sober. All those people will drink the nectar of the Gita. Now, this is Srila
Prabhupada correlating Isopanisad and Gita Upanishad. So, the Isopanisad talks
about Gi..., vidya, and Srila Prabhupada explains vidya based on Bhagavad Gita.
This is, now, this is called as jnana:

        etaj jnanam iti proktam
        ajnanam yad ato 'nyatha

13.8-12, the twelwe C and D says that this is knowledge, and apart from this,
whatever there may be, it is ignorance. Now, the, "ahimsa". Now, Srila
Prabhupada gives extraordinary translation of "ahimsa" over here. Normally, we
will say non-violence. But Srila Prabhupada gives a much and deeper translation.

"(3) One should not become a source of anxiety to others by the actions of his
body, by the thoughts of his mind, or by his words."

So, this means that one not only, should one not commit violence to, to create
agitation and anxiety to others, that is also way of committing violence. And
that also, one should not do. And one should not be anxiou..., cause anxiety to
others by our thoughts, words or actions. This is a very profound definition of
"ahimsa".

And then, like that, Srila Prabhupada g..., gives the list, So, "acaryopasanam".
That is worship of the spiritual master. That is the sixth item. Srila
Prabhupada translates that as:

"(6) One should search out a bona fide spiritual master who can lead him
gradually to the stage of spiritual realization, and one must submit himself to
such a spiritual master, render him service and ask relevant questions."

So, what is this? This is a translation of 4.34 in the Bhagavad Gita. 4.34 is:

        tad viddhi pranipatena
        pariprasnena sevaya
        upadeksyanti te jnanam
        jnaninas tattva-darsinah

So, how one should approach the spiritual master. Srila Prabhupada is giving
that also. So, actually, when Srila Prabhupada gives us his purports. He gives
us, like there are some cars. So, the cars, they say maximum mileage per hour,
or per litre. Maximum mileage. It will go this much miles. So, like that, Srila
Prabhupada gives us maximum mileage per purport. You know, whatever purport he
gives us, he gives us maximum knowledge in it. Just, prof..., Prabhupada's
translation is not just a cursory function, which he has to do. This is
Engli..., This is Sanskrit. This is English. Let me translate and put it.
Prabhupada wants to convey the profound wisdom that is there in the Vedic
literature. And knowing that, it is, that, in wisdom has to be conveyed in a way
that people can apply and benefit. Therefore, it is there, it is, the, the
Bhagavad Gita says that "acaryopasanam". Now, Krishna was speaking at a time
when people knew how to do "acaryopasanam". Now, people today do not know.
Therefore, Srila Prabhupada says that, ok, you have to go to the spiritual
master and search out. Our spiritual master, what kind of spiritual master? Not
simply an ashravat guru. Not simply a person who will smile and just raise the
hands and blessing. No. A person who will lead one gradually to the stage of
spiritual realisation. So, Prabhupada is, that, well, "acaryopasanam", what kind
of acharya should we do "upasanam" of it else that? And how "acaryopasanam" has
to be done, it is not just that we take aarti plate and do "upasanam".
"upasanam" is done by submission, service and inquiry, "SSI". So, that is what
Sri... Submit. Service. And Inquiry.

So, this is how Srila Prabhupada gives us maximum mileage in every purport that
he gives us. And then he go..., goes on like this and gives the various items of
knowledge, he translates. And then:

        janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-
        duhkha-dosanudarsanam

This is an important point. So what has Prabhupada translated that?

"(12) One should always remember that as long as he has a material body he must
face the miseries of repeated birth, old age, disease and death. There is no use
in making plans to get rid of these mar..., miseries of the material body."

Why is that no use? Because it is impossible. Everybody has to die.

"The best course is to find out the means by which one may regain his spiritual
identity."

So, therefore, if we see, this is knowledge. Wha..., what exactly is knowledge?
Knowledge means to recognise h..., that a..., why I am suffering and what is the
solution for my suffering. Why am, am I unhappy? Why am I dissatisfied? Why am I
having problems? So, that when we understand. And they were, we try to find
solutions to those problems. So, the scriptures tell us the specific problem
that we are facing may be many. I may have lost a job. I may have some
relationship problems. My health may not be good right now. I may have some
tension with my neighbour. Or my laptop may not be working. We may have so many
problems like that. But these are all specific problems which will come and go.
But actually, there are generic problems which are far bigger. And they are
birth, old age, disease and death. And we recognise these problems and then we
try to solve these problems. How do we solve it? By raising our consciousness.
We are at the material level of consciousness where we suffer because of this.
But when we understand I am atma. For the atma, there is no "jara-vyadhi-" and
"mrtyu". And then, there is no open urgent modes.

Now, Srila Prabhupada goes further and gives translation of all the items. And
then, he gives:

        vivikta-desa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-samsadi

That is the item. And interestingly, Srila Prabhupada groups the last four items
as two, as a, as a pairs. That means, in the Bhagavad Gita, at least, seventeen
and eighteen, becomes seventeen over here. And Bhagavad Gita, basi..., nineteen
and twenty becomes eighteenth over here. So, what is that? Seventeen and eighteen?

        vivikta-desa-sevitvam
        aratir jana-samsadi

So, "vivikta-desa-sevitvam", Prabhupada translates it:

"(17) One should develop a liking for residence in a secluded place with a calm
and quiet atmosphere favorable for spiritual culture"

So, he is giving so much ex.., explanation. And:

        aratir jana-samsadi

"one should avoid congested places where nondevotees congregate."

So, by this, because when, if, there are nondevotees congregate, their, their,
their collective presence creates a, a mass materialistic psychology, which can
be quite draining for our consciousness. Which can just s..., s..., reap us off,
our feet, and submerge us in materialism. That is why we avoid such place, as
much as possible. And then:

        adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam
        tattva-jnanartha-darsanam

These are the nineteenth, twentieth item, Prabhupada translates these as:

"(18) One should become a scientist or philosopher and conduct research into
spiritual knowledge"

So, "adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam". And then, "tattva-jnanartha-darsanam". So,
"tattva-jna", one should conduct research into spiritual knowledge.
"tattva-jnanartha-darsanam", so why one should study spiritual knowledge?
Why "adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam"? Because only spiritual knowledge is eternal.

"... recognizing that spiritual knowledge whereas material knowledge ends with
the death of the body."

So, again, it is interesting. Srila Prabhupada equates here, scientist or
philosopher. So, how can those two be equated? Now, today, philosophy is
considered to be a branch of humanities. And science is a, considered a branch
of sciences. And these two, there is, if you study academic circle, there is a
factor and a rapture between the two. And the scientists, those who are in
sciences, they feel that we have made all the practical progress. We have made
all the practical contributions. The technology, the help for humanity, huma...,
that has come from us. Humanity has nothing for us. And they look down on
humanity. Whereas the, those who are in humanity, they say that, ultimately, you
know, science has just made things faster and better, faster and better at a, at
a technological level. But as far as human values are concerned. You know,
science cannot do that. It is humanity is only which talks about the things
which make human beings human beings. So, there is this conflict between science
and philosophy. In fact, within science only, there was a whole, almost a decade
of what was called the science wars. The wars between philosophers of science
and scientists. You know, huge intellectual wars with books and papers being
written and counter written, and counter counter written.

But from Srila Prabhupada's perspective, you know, ultimately, all knowledge is
meant to take us towards spiritual truth. So, through philosophy, one can do
research and come to spiritual knowledge. And through science, one can come
through spiritual knowledge. So, philosophy, we can call it as metaphysics. Of
course, philosophy itself has branches. Metaphysics is one of them. And science,
we can say, it is physics. Science has again other branches. But took, I
mean, the parallel clear over here. So, whether it is physics or metaphysics,
ultimately, we have to understand spiritual knowledge. So, physics can also lead
us to spirituality. Metaphysics can also lead us to spirituality. Therefore,
Srila Prabhupada emphasizes it, whatever one studies, ultimately, come to
spirituality. And spiritual knowledge is permanent. Whereas material knowledge
ends with the death of the body. So, whatever we acquire, is not going to go
ahead with us. But spiritual knowledge will stay:

        purvabhyasena tenaiva
        hriyate hy avaso 'pi sah

Krishna describes in the Bhagavad Gita, in a response to Arjuna's question from
6.37 to 39, he describes the reply from 6.40 to 45 that whatever spiritual
knowledge we acquire, so 42-43 say that, in the next life, it will come back to
you. And, you would be attracted to k..., the spiritual principles, almost
helplessly. And thereby, you will keep making spiritual advancement. Now, what
are these, now we may say, if, what is your education, if we ask today people?
The person may say, ok, I am a B. I am a BA. I am an LLB. I am a CA. So, people
may tell their degrees. But these degrees, they have their value, no doubt. But
actually speaking, real knowledge is the development of character. So, we will
look now from a historical perspective here.

Changing conceptions of knowledge. So, talking Prahlad Maharaja, Socrates and
Francis Bacon. So, Prahlada Maharaja says in the Bhagavatam, you know, when
Hiranyakasipu asks, what is the best thing that you learnt? So, he said that the
best thing I learnt is devotional service to Lord Vishnu. So, he says that:

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
        sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

He describes these nine items of devotional service and then he says:

        iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau
        bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā
        kriyeta bhagavaty addhā
        tan manye ’dhītam uttamam

This is the best education, I say. What is the best education? When these nine
elements, nine activities, "iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau", when these are offered to
Lord Vishnu. "bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā", "nava-lakṣaṇā", "bhaktiś", when they
are offered to Lord Vishnu, then create a "bhagavaty addhā", they increase the
attraction to the Supreme Lord. And that is the best knowledge. So, he says what
is the test of knowledge? Knowledge inspir..., knowledge comprises of doing the
activities that engender. That foster devotion. That lead to devotion. So,
essentially, knowledge is devotion. So, this is the transcendental understanding
of knowledge. All the knowledge that we acquire is ultimately meant for
increasing our attraction to the Supreme Lord. And the Bhagavatam says that if
we do not increase our attraction to Supreme Lord, whatever else we may do, it
is actually simply a waste of time. "Śrama eva hi kevalam".

Now, from the transcendental perspective is, knowledge is meant for increasing
devotion. And that is what we see in the Bhagavad Gita also. When Krishna says,
what happens to a person who is Buddha, in 10.8, the first verse of the chator
sloki Bhagavad Gita, he says:

        aham sarvasya prabhavo
        mattah sarvam pravartate
        iti matva bhajante mam
        budha bhava-samanvitah

So, one who understands that I am the source of everything material and
spiritual. Such a person becomes a buddha. A..., such a person becomes
enlightened. Such a person becomes enlightened. What is the result?
"bhava-samanvitah", person wholeheartedly worships me. So, knowledge leads to
devotion. Now, from the transcendental perspective, we will come down to one
rank lower. That is sattvik perspective. Sattvik perspective is knowledge is
virtue. Knowledge is virtue means, Socrates said this, that knowledge should
lead to the development of good qualities. And a person, the knowledge that is
there, it should be something which is reflected in the character of the person.
If that is not happening, then whatever the person has acquired is actually not
of much use. Now, the idea that knowledge is virtue is very much cons...,
consistent with the Vedic understanding of sattva guna knowledge. "sattvat
sanjayate jnanam", sattva guna leads to knowledge. So, sa..., it is, Krishna
does not say abyasat sanjayate jnanam. It is not study alone that leads to
knowledge. It is living in the mood of goodness. So, when we live in goodness,
then knowledge is cultivated not just as information in the head, but
as a transformation of character. So, this is also what the Bhagavad Gita is
talking about in 13.8-12. Here, Krishna is not focused, focusing on the
transcendental perspective, speaking from the gu..., sattvik perspective. That
knowledge should lead to the development of all these qualities.

Now, as Kali-Yuga progressed, let us look at Francis Bacon. He was a renaissance
thinker, post-renaissance thinker in the European history, one of the pioneers
of empiricism. And he, his thoughts led to the development of science and
technology, especially. He envisioned technology being able to control and
change the world in the future. So, he said, knowledge is power. Now, this is
clearly rajasic. In raja guna, the essence of a person's mental attitude is
controllership. What the person wants to do is, how can I make everything happen
according to my will? And the knowledge that I have is also for that purpose of
making things happen according to my will. So, technology is essentially about
make, bending nature to human being. Knowledge is power. And today, when we have
these hightech gadgets, you know. You press one button, and an email goes
somewhere else. We press one button, and a phone call goes to somebody else.
Now, it is not necessarily bad. It is useful. It can be even useful even for
devotional service. But the point is that when knowledge is reduced to this.
This is one aspect of knowledge. When we acquire knowledge, we, we get some
control. But if the whole conception of knowledge is shrunk down to the power
that it gives one. And what kind of power? It is external power. It is not
internal power. That is a technological power as we discussed. There is not
enhanced willpower. So, knowledge is virtue means, knowledge leads to willpower.
And willpower leads to the person be able to use even technology properly.

So, knowledge is power means, people are simply concerned with how much I can
control. And if I have, if my knowledge did not lead to go..., the development
of good qualities, then the more power I have, that power will be used by my bad
qualities for doing harm. So, this is the current definition of knowledge. It is
la..., largely equated with power.

So, let us look at this further now. So, the divorce of education from
transformation leads to disruption. So, education was originally associated with
transformation. Education comes from educare. Educare means to bring out that
which is within. What is within? Within, we are souls. As souls, we are pure. We
are godly. And that godliness has to be brought out for education. But when
education just becomes something, a matter of skills for external control, then
there is a divorce of education from transformation. And then that leads to
disruption. Disruption in that person's life, disruption in that, in the soc...,
social f..., structure because of the way the person behaves. Why? Because that
person is not having the self-mastery to be able to contribute properly. That is
why we have in so many, so much in today that, in United States, sometimes,
s..., young children, young students, young. They take guns. And they just go
crazy. And they shoot others. And some of the, sometimes, it happens in elite
universities also. And it is not just in United States. It happens elsewhere
also.

So, again, what is happening? According to modern definition of knowledge,
modern definition of success and education, there is just the capacity to have
information. That is all that is considered important. But transformation is not
counted very important. Now, value education is there in many universities
nowadays. And it is good. Value education is important. But how are values to be
developed? That is something which is not really very well understood. Is it
that just by speaking about values, people will be able to develop values?
Actually, there has to be a culture, which supports and exalts those values.
For example, if there is a value of respectfulness. Let us say, we should
respect others. We should respect our elders. We should respect our equals also
appro..., as appropriate. Now, we may talk about how we should respect others,
but if the whole culture is of satire and sarcasm, and sar..., and sardonic
speech, then w..., that culture will more than counter whatever value education
that is taught. So, values have to be coupled with a culture. Then, they will
lead to transformation. Today, the campus culture is such that very few values
are cultivated in their cultu..., campus, campus culture. That is why the
divorce of education from transformation happens. And that is why the students
who may be top person in the Universities, but they are often, pray to bad
habits. Smoking, drinking, illicit sex, now, even if we do not say from
spiritual perspectives, but even from material perspective, smoking, drinking,
drug addictions, these are very harmful. So, it leads to disruption.

So, knowledge is not for pooling, but pulling towards Krishna. Pooling means
accumulating. So much information is there in the head. 28:41
