Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7bxJMIpb7k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=XtDV-NfN1T2KydYOl44x5XpIa8N8MTU0MDEwMjYyMkAxNTQwMDE2MjIy&v=l7bxJMIpb7k&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_018_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to our Isopanisad course. We discussed mantra thirteen in three
detailed classes. Where we first discussed about demigod worship. Then, we
discussed about Mayavada. And then, we discussed about social service. So, these
three are the s..., alternatives to Krishna that people can choose as objects of
worship. And we discussed how all of them are ultimately futile. Now, the
Isopanisad goes to the next mantra where it talks about how we can balance. Just
because everything is, everything in the material world is temporary, does not
mean it all has to be rejected. It has to be utilised. So, just as mantra
eleven talked about the balance between vidya and avidya. This mantra will talk
about balance between sambhuti and vinaso..., sambhuti and asambhuti. So, here
the word asambhuti does not refer to just temporary material things. It refers
to that which is used for the service of Krishna in the material realm. So, it
refers to knowledge of this world, which ca..., helps us to become fixed in the
service of Krishna, use it in the Krishna service, service of Krishna and go
back to the spiritual world. So, let us look at the mantra. He says mantra
fourteen:

    sambhūtiṁ ca vināśaṁ ca
    yas tad vedobhayaṁ saha
    vināśena mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā
    sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute

So, earlier, the word for, was sambhuti and asambhuti. So, here asambhuti is
ref..., re..., replaced by "vināśaṁ". The two are commonates. They are more or
less equivalent words in terms of that implications. Asambhuti is that which is
temporary. "vināśaṁ" is that which is temporary. So, "yas tad vedobhayaṁ saha",
"veda", "ubhayam", when one knows both of these, when, that person become free
from what? "vināśena mṛtyuṁ tīrtvā", that by knowledge of material world, one
will be able to navigate through the material world, through the ocean of
immortality. "sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute", by sambhuti one will attain immortality.
So, Srila Prabhupada translates this as:

"One should know perfectly the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
transcendental name, form, qualities and pastimes, as well as the temporary
material creation with its temporary demigods, men and animals. When one knows
these, he surpasses death and the ephemeral cosmic manifestation with it, and in
the eternal kingdom of God he enjoys his eternal life of bliss and knowledge."

So, Srila Prabhupada translates sambhuti as the Lord along with Nama Rupa Guna
Lila. And then he translates sa..., sa..., "vināśena" as a material creation
with its own variety of living beings.

So, let us look at the purport now. In the purport, Srila Prabhupada basically
talks about, the first two paragraphs is "vināśena". Nothing can make this world
deathless, not even science. When "sambhūtiṁ ca vināśaṁ ca", so Prabhupada's
reasoning in this purport is that this world is temporary. And science also
cannot change the reach out this world. So, then, what can we do? Is there a
realm beyond death? Yes, there is. So, Vedas give us information about the death
filled world and the death free world. The death filled world is this material
world. Death free world is the world beyond. So, Krishna talks about this also
in the Eighth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, very contrast, the temporary and
the material, and encourage Arjuna to strive for the eternal. So, from 8.15
onwards until 8.22, He talks about contrast. So, 8.15 is:

        duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

Then 8.16 is:

        ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ

Right from Brahma's planet, down to the lowest, all are places of repeated birth
and death. And then He talks about how even Brahman's lifespan ends. And then
from 20 to 22, He talks about the spiritual world. To 8.20, He says:

        paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ’nyo

The another "bhāvaḥ". So, this set of verses, 15 to 22 is illustrating about
Srila Prabhupada is saying over here that the Vedas give information about the
death filled as well as the death free world. Then, "sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute".
"sambhūtyāmṛtam aśnute" means only by surrender to Krishna can we transcend
death.

So, this is talked about then in a more specific sense in the next verse where
it is, says. We have to give up misconceptions to attain immortality. So, all of
us, we can have various misconceptions. For example, I am the body is a prominent
misconception. I am God is another misconception. So, like that, there are
misconce..., many misconceptions which prevent us from attaining the shelter of
God. So, we have to give up these misconceptions by which we can ultimately
attain immortality. When we attain God, automatically, we attain immortality.

        mām upetya punar janma
        duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam
        nāpnuvanti

When we attain Krishna, and He says in 8.15, then we will not come back to this
world. So, attaining mo..., immortality means attaining Krishna, attaining love
for Krishna. And attaining Krishna thereof. So, in this class, we will primarily
focus on understanding how the world, material world with its variety of
timescales for different living beings, is still ultimately mortal. So, we will
look at the concept of time. Because time is a prominent reality in this world.

        kalo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddho

Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita, time I am the destroyer of the world. So, let
us look at this. So, before that, Srila Prabhupada talks about the six, he calls
these are six laws of transformation. We discussed this earlier also in our
discussion on mantra eleven that the living things and the non-living things.
The difference is non-living things basically go through three phases: creation,
deterioration, destruction. Whereas non-living, whereas living things go through
three additional phases: growth, maintenance, reproduction. Along with birth,
depro..., deterioration and death. So, now, Srila Prabhupada in his purport
called these six as the six laws of transformation. Everything material has to
get transformed through these six things. And because of that, because these six
things cannot be stopped, therefore, ultimately, death cannot be stopped. So,
this is how, the, everything in the material world is unstoppably, irreversibly
moving towards destruction and death.

Let us look at the concept of time now to understand how, what is the
implication of this death. So, now, in today's mainstream society, there is the
Judeo-Christian modern scientific time model. What is that? It is a linear
approach from start to the end. So, for example, they say that, one particular
point, there is a creation of universe. And then from there onwards, 07:41
