Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tDqStDJW15k
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_020_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_16_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=VI06kVb5148mz5A0-78W5fCVWy58MTU0MDEwMjY4M0AxNTQwMDE2Mjgz&event=video_description&v=tDqStDJW15k

Hare Krishna.

Welcome back to the last section of the Isopanisad course. Today, we will be
studying mantra sixteen. This is a part of the last section of the Isopanisad
wherein prayers are being offered. So, the f..., fifteenth mantra had the
prayer, please remove your blazing effulgence so that I can see your, behold
your face.

        satyasyāpihitaṁ mukham

Now, the same prayer is continued with a devotional element being added to it,
in terms of see..., beseeching the mercy of the Lord further. And we will see
that more and more in the last two mantras. So, let us look at mantra sixteen.

    pūṣann ekarṣe yama sūrya prājāpatya
    vyūha raśmīn samūha
    tejo yat te rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ
    tat te paśyāmi yo 'sāv asau puruṣaḥ so 'ham asmi

So, "pūṣann", the word "pūṣann" had come in the previous mantra also. "pūṣann"
is maintainer. "ekarṣe". So, "ṛṣe" is philosopher, thinker. "ekarṣe", that the
Lord is the original thinker. "yama", "yama" and "miyama" are the starting of
the yoga process. "yama" means rules, regu..., regulative principles. So,
"Yamaraja" is one who regulates. So, He, ultimately, the Lord is the supreme
"yama". "sūrya". "sūrya" can mean Sun. But it, "sūrya" al..., can also mean
the s..., the destination of the suras. "prājāpatya", so He is the well-wisher.
He is the protector. He is the maintainer of the "prājāpatyas". "vyūha raśmīn
samūha". "vyūha" is kindly remove. "raśmīn", the rays. The same prayers
continuing. There is glorification of the Lord, how great that Absolute Truth
is. And then there is a beseechment, beseeching to the Lord, please remove.
"samūha", kindly withdraw. So, "vyūha" and "samūha", please remove.

"tejo yat te rūpaṁ", so now, right in the Isopanisad, we will see, there is the
word "rūpaṁ". So, some people say that Upanishads talk about impersonalism. They
do talk about impersonalism, but there is personalism also. And if you look at
the flow of thought, in, as it is moving towards its close, it is actually
moving towards personal understanding. "tejo yat te rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ". And
what is the nature of that form? "kalyāṇa" is auspiciousness. "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ" is
most auspicious, good, better, best. So, there is, there are degrees and
superlatives. Similarly, "kalyāṇa", "kalyāṇa-tara", and "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ", so it
is supremely auspicious. "tat te paśyāmi", so if there is any doubt. Whether
this might, the "rūpaṁ" might just be metaphorical reference. No, it is "tat te
paśyāmi". I want to see that form. So, there is a real form. And that form is
supremely auspicious. And the sage is desiring to see that form.

And then, "yo 'sāv asau puruṣaḥ so 'ham asmi". "yo 'sāv asau", as that person
is, so am I. So, "'sāv", as the S..., Sun is, like the Sun. "asau puruṣaḥ so
'ham asmi", so, that person is effulgent, supremely effulent, and similarly, I
am. So, this mantra is an excellent example of "Achintya Bheda Abheda" in
action. The impersonalists will take only the "so 'ham asmi". "'ham" is I. "so"
is that. "so 'ham asmi", that means I am that. So, this, they use to try to
prove that actually the Absolute Truth is non-personal, and I and the Absolute
Truth are ultimately the same. So, that is one aspect of the teaching of the
Upanishads. But there is another aspect which is personalist. And that is very
clearly stated through "rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ paśyāmi". So, if we have to honestly
represent the teachings of the Upanishads, then we have to see everything that
they are seeing. Not just the part that agrees with our philosophy, or with
one's own philosophy. So, the impersonalists, they just take the part which
agrees with their philosophy, and neglect the other part or subordinate the
other part by saying that it is Vyavaharika. And ours is Paramarthika. This
actually rips apart the shastra. And this is, this is not actually understanding
shastra. It is imposing one's own philosophy on shastra. So, the, is, is, so,
here, "rūpaṁ kalyāṇa-tamaṁ" is there. And "so 'ham asmi" is also there. So, how
can the two be reconciled? That is through Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's teachings
of qualitative oneness, and quantitative difference. Let us look at Srila
Prabhupada's translation.

"O my Lord, O primeval philosopher, maintainer of the universe, O regulating
principle, destination of the pure devotees, well-wisher of the progenitors of
mankind, please remove the effulgence of Your transcendental rays so that I can
see Your form of bliss. You are the eternal Supreme Personality of Godhead, like
unto the sun, as am I."

So, here, Srila Prabhupada's translation makes it clear that what is being
referred to is the qualitative oneness. So, now, let us look at the purport. So,
"Vyuha rashmin". Prabhupada talks about please remove. Please remove the
effulgence. So, he explains that beyond the Brahman, is Bhagavan. And then,
Prabhupada emphasizes the point "kalyāṇa-tamaṁ", the most auspicious. Then, he
says how Bhagavan is the the most auspicious realisation. There are levels of
auspiciousness. But Bhagavan is the most auspicious realisation. Then, "pūṣann",
mantainer. The, how the Lord especially maintains the devotees, and in general,
maintains everyone and everything else. So, "so 'ham asmi", how the living
entity is one, yet different from the Lord. We will discuss Jnana a little bit
on this, in, in, while analysing this. And the favor of the Lord sought by this
prayer is fulfilled in pure devotional service. Prabhupada makes this profound
point in the conclusion of this purport. So, let us look at these points one by
one.

"Vyuha rashmin", beyond Brahman is Bhagavan. So, the fundamental difference
between impersonalism and personalism is that both consider their, their, both
consider that their own conception is the absolute, is the highest reality. So,
impersonalists consider Brahman to be the highest reality. And they say when
form is imposed on Brahman, or form is accepted by Brahman, then Bhagavan
appears. So, their idea is Brahman is higher. And Bhagavan is lower. Because
something is added to Brahman, Brahman and then Bhagavan comes. But what is
added is illusory. What is added is temporary. Whereas the Vaishnava
understanding is that Bhagavan is the highest route and when some aspect of the
Absolute Truth is not understood, so "sat-cit-ananda", when "cit" and "ananda"
aspects of the Absolute Truth are not co..., properly comprehended. They do not,
practically, do not, "sat" aspect is comprehended, at that time, one sees the
Brahman. So, if we look at scriptures, s..., they do talk about Brahman. And
they do talk about Bhagavan also. But prominently, whether it is the Upanishads,
or whether it is the Puranas, or even the original Vedas, there are lots and
lots of prayers. And those prayers indicate that there is a higher reality to
whom one is praying. And sim..., people say yes that, this is true. But
ultimately, one has to go beyond that conception of higher reality to merge into
that. You know, that, whatever conception of Absolute Truth they are cherishing.
But this notion is not really subordina..., s..., substantiated by scripture. It
has to be extrapolated from scripture. So, we discussed there several verses.

        brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

I am the supporter of Brahman. And so, so, I am the foundation and some...
something which is a rest on me. That is Brahman. So, in that sense, Bhagavan is
higher. Brahman is something which is, which is resting on Him. So, if you
con..., consider these two conceptions, that means something is imposed on
Brahman, then Bhagavan comes. Or something is supported by Bragavan, that is
what Brahman is. So, something that is dependent on Brahman. That is a partial
manifestation of Bhagavan. That is Brahman. So, Bhagavad Gita supports this
conception. 14.27 says:

        brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

That actually, I am the form of the isano Brahman. So, the Bhagavan is the
higher reality. And if we compare the two, the conception of impersonalism seems
to be intellectually appealing. Because in there, no forms. There is no
personality. There is just oneness. However, it strips the Absolute Truth off
one of the attributes. That is the Absolute Truth which has form. So, the,
actually, it is, from the intellectual point of view also. The conception of
Brahman is the Absolute Truth may have its appeal. But it is not complete.
Something is, the, Absolute Truth has something missing. And beyond that, the
Absolute Truth loses all emotional appeal. 10:38
