Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mGRNC4vMLMc
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_010_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_08_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=mGRNC4vMLMc&redir_token=ztn3DboNiuOkG887IwV2zCVfcNZ8MTU0MDEwMjM0NUAxNTQwMDE1OTQ1&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

So, now we start with the eighth verse of the Isopanisad. This is the last verse
in the second section. And in this second section, we are understanding how to
understand the Ishvara who p..., possesses inconceivable attributes. So, let us
look at the section overview quickly. So, four to eight section was understand
Ishvara with spiritual vision. The first part of that, that was, four to five,
how Ishvara has inconceivable attributes. Six to seven was first develop
spiritual vision towards worldly objects, things, events, and then direct that
spiritual vision towards the Supreme Lord, towards that Absolute Truth and
understand Him. This vision developed further and directed to the Ishavara helps
us to understand Him.

So, this is actually not a translation. This is a summary which gives a
inclining of the flow which gives an overall understanding of the flow. So, let
us look at the verse now. Let us see what the mantra actually says.

        sa paryagāc chukram akāyam avraṇam
        asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham
        kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr
        yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ

So, "sa paryagāc chukram", so "sa" refers to that person. Who is that person?
The seeker. So that person was referred to in the previous two verses that such
a person sees equally, "ātmaivābhūd vijānataḥ", such a person who sees everybody
as spiritual, as soul, as parts of God, now, how does that person see God? "sa
paryagāc", such a person should be able to see like this. "chukram", is
omnipotent, extremely powerful. "akāyam", "akāyam", Prabhupada translates as
unembodied. Let us see what this means. "avraṇam", and who is, cannot, who is
not reproached.

"asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham", he has no veins. He is pure. He is not
contaminated by sin. "kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr", so such a person is
"kavir", that means a wise person. "manīṣī" is philosopher. "paribhūḥ" is the
greatest of all. "svayambhūr", self-sufficient.

"yāthātathyato 'rthān vyadadhāc", that means just in pursuance of, just in
proportion to us, which a person offers. "'rthān vyadadhāc", the desirables,
"'rthān", gives, "vyadadhāc", awards. "chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ", "chāśvatī"
means eternal, forever. So, from time immemorial, where, this person has been
doing this. "samā" is hindi. "samābhyaḥ" is sanskrit time. So, this person
has understood thus having all these properties. These are characteristics of
the Absolute Truth, there are described in this verse as mahabhagavata
understands the Absolute Truth.

"Such a person must factually know", "sa paryagāc", "the", "the greatest of
all", "sa paryagāc chukram", "akāyam avraṇam", so the Personality of Godhead.
Srila Prabhupada makes it clear in his translation itself that what the verse is
talking about is not an impersonal Absolute. It is the Personality of Godhead,
who is unembodied, "akāyam". "avraṇam asnāviram", he, so, so "avraṇam" is beyond
reproach, "asnāviram", without waves. "asnāviram śuddham apāpa-viddham",
"asnāviram" is without waves, pure and uncontaminated. "śuddham apāpa-viddham".
Then "kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr", so "kavir manīṣī" is philosopher,
self-sufficient is "svayambhūr", and then "yāthātathyato 'rthān vya", so
"paribhūḥ", the greatest of all. Srila Prabhupada has put first and foremost in
the translation, such a person must factually know the greatest of all. So,
"paryagāc chukram", and "paribhūḥ", Prabhupada has put both of them together
here, "the self-sufficient philosopher who has been fulfilling everyone's desire
since time immemorial.", "vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ".

So, let us look at the overview of the, we will see that, so, "akāyam" is
unembodied, and "asnāviram" is without veins. So, what does it 04:40


