Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4YFVuWbnW98
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=Lze9iQpj0Xcg1EP1_RVFGaku1U98MTU0MDEwMjUzMUAxNTQwMDE2MTMx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_015_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_12_part_2_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=4YFVuWbnW98

Hare Krishna.

Welcome to the Isopanisad class on mantra twelwe. This is the second part of
mantra twelwe. First part, we discussed about the demigods. So, demigod worship
is staying in the dark material world. And in this class, we will discuss about
mayavada. And:

        tato bhūya iva te tamo
        ya u sambhūtyām ratāḥ

Impersonalists who mislead people go to the darkest regions of hell. So, we will
discuss why impersonalism is so strongly condemned by our acharyas. So, firstly,
impersonalista are of two broad types. Brahmavadis and Mayavadis. So,
Brahmavadis are mentioned by Lord Krishna, in verses three to five of chapter
ten, chapter twelwe. And they do not commit any offense to the form of the Lord.
They are just attracted to the impersonal Brahman. And Krishna says that, their
progress is slow and troublesome. Now, Mayavadis are talked about by Krishna in
17.24, and 9.14 and 15. And they offend the Lord. So, because they offend the
form of the Lord. So, Bra..., Brahmavadis are not attracted to the personal form
of the Lord. Either way, they do not know about that form, or they have not
associated with devotees who have, who have, a..., who will attract them to the
form of the Lord.

        bhakti sanjayate bhakti

So, bhakti comes from the association of devotees. When there is no association
of devotees, at that time, it may well happen that, they are more attracted to
the formless Brahman. That is Brahmavadis. And Krishna says, those who are
attracted like this:

        avyaktasakta-cetasam
        kleso 'dhikataras tesam

For those people, because they are "avyaktasakta", try to the impersonal. For
them, there is kleso. But then in contrast them. But then in contrast with that,
there is mayavadis. Those who offend the form of the Lord.

        avajananti mam mudha

So, those people, Krishna says they are "mudha". He does not, does not just say,
there is "kleso" in their path. But there is "moghasa", moga karma. Everything
they do go in waste. Now, we will look at mayavada a little bit more deeply. So,
is impersonalism taught in the scriptures? Impersonalism in scriptures is
transitional, not final. So, on the right side, on, on one side in the chart,
you see, the scriptures you are talking about. Vedas. Upanishads. And
Bhagavatam. So, the Vedas talk about karma kanda. The Upanishads talk about
jnana kanda. And the Bhagavatam talks about bhakti, which is the conclusion of
the Vedic scriptures. So, now, what do the Vedas do? You see the arrow moving
upwards. So, the arrow moving upwards indicates that in karma kanda, people are
interested in material things. They are interested in sense gratification, artha
and kama, as we discussed earlier. But they are ready to do it under the
guidance of scripture. So, by this, they are elevated upwards because they are
developing faith in God. And their consciousness is slowly getting elevated.
They are at least not going to, towards tama-guna, although they may be in
raja-guna. Because they have faith in scripture, they will move slowly towards
goodness. Now, the Vedas glorify initially those people who want to gain
material things, but are ready to get, gain those material things through
religious means. But the Upanishads go one step forward. And they, see, what is
the use of all these material forms? You lo..., you are attracted to heavens.
You are attracted to beautiful looking people. It is all temporary. It is all
illusionary. Down with the form. So, now, the Upanishads are transitional. They
take people from material, fr.., material form to spiritual form. Those who are
attracted to material form, the Upanishads said, it is all temporary. It is all
illusory. Give it up. And then, they take them to the spiritual reality. But the
Upanishads are transitional. That means it take, if you consider the material
forms to be negative axis, and spiritual forms to be positive axis, then
Upanishads are at the zero position primarily. They take people from the
negative to the positive. Do they teach impersonalism? They do not teach
impersonalism as their conclusion. But impersonalism is definitely there in the
Upanishads as a transitional teaching. That means:

        arupayoru-rupaya

Like we discussed in the Bhagavatam.

        pasyaty acakshuh sa srinoty akarnah

So, the Upanishads say that the Absolute Truth does not have ears. But then the
Absolute Truth sees also. So, how this happens? While talking about that, while
focusing on the s..., getting materialistic people focus on spiritual reality,
material forms are negated. They are rejected. And as spiritual forms are being
introduced, in the transition, some verses can seem impersonalistic. But if you
look at the conclusion, the final teaching, it is not impersonalism. The
Upanishads take one towards personalism. And that personal conclusion is
actually emphasized the most in the Bhagavatam. In the sattvik Puranas, and
especially the Bhagavatam. Where bhakti and spiritual form, spiritual
activities, spiritual personality, and spiritual relationships are talked about.
So, the impersonalism is there in the scriptures, but it is transitional as a
stepping stone from, for those who are in material form to get them to a.., be
attracted towards spiritual form.

So, now let us try to understand this person..., we look at the history of
Mayavada. So, mayavada is a subsection of impersonalism. So, how Mayavadas
spread during medieval times. Then, how it got the most and it became twisted
during modern times. And what are the disasters caused by Mayavada. So, we will
look at this.

First, let us look at the basic idea of Mayavada. So, Mayavada divides reality
into Vyavaharika and Paramarthika. Vyavaharika means practical. Paramarthika
means transcendental. So, the idea is that all form and variety, that is there,
it is in the realm of operational reality, practical reality. But in actual
reality, there is no form. There is no variety. There is just consciousness.
There is just Brahman. That is the idea of Mayavada. Now, in Mayavada, what
happens is, basing this teaching on scripture is very difficult. Because
scripture in a vast section talks about relationships, talks about
reciprocation, talks about God as a person, and His devotees worshipping Him.
So, how do we re..., how does Mayavada reconcile this? Mayavada says that
actually wherever scripture talks about form, personality, relationships, that
is lower level teaching of scripture. And actually, scripture's teaching is
confidential. And that is whatever teaches Paramarthika. So, they divide
scripture into two divisions. One is higher level reality and other lower level
reality. And they say the most of scripture also teaches us lower level reality.
And actually, the higher level reality is taught in a sma..., few sections of
scriptures. And Shankaracharya who was a proponent of Mayavada, he and other
mayavadis, what they say is that, the scriptures have maha vakhya. And
everything else in scripture is lagu vakhya. Maha means great. Lagu means lower
level, smaller. So, f..., Vaghyana Brahman, Sarvamkalmada Brahman, Aham
Brahmasmi. Like these, sarmah vakhyas. And these all seem to say that the
Absolute Truth with imperson..., tattvo masi. So, you are that. Everything is
Brahma. I am Brahma. Brahma is conscious. These kind of statements, they say,
say, are the conclusion of the Vedic literature. And everything else that is
taught is a phi..., lower level reality. Now, by this tool of dividing reality
into Paramarthika and Vyavaharika, and dividing scripture into that which is
just Paramarthika and that which is just Vyavaharika, what happens is, Mayavada
creates a system of reasoning by which any s..., any sc..., any scriptural verse
and quotation which contradicts their idea, they will immediately relegate it to
a lower level reality. So, it is a very self-serving system by which all
contradictions are conveniently rejected as lower level. Why did Shankaracharya
have to teach this?

Because historically speaking, Buddhism had spread very widely all over the
country, and, and people had to be brought back to the Vedic fold. So, you know,
five thousand years ago, Vyasadeva wrote down the Vedic literature. And he wrote
down all the literature. In those literature, he focused on giving karma kanda,
jnana kanda and bhakti. But then, people started a..., abusing the karma kanda
section for the sake of doing indiscriminate, unrestricted animal killing in the
name of doing yagnas which had animal sacrifices in them. They started abusing
the Vedas. So, at that time, Buddha had to come. Because so many animals were
being killed. And what did Buddha do? He said that, just reject. He said that,
cannot you see that animals suffer pain? If you cannot give life, how can you
take life? Then people said, but Vedas tell us to kill animals. He says, what
kind of books are these if they tell that you kill animals? Then do not reject
the Vedas. Do not accept the Vedas. Reject them. And by that, he said, then what
about God? He says, do not bother about God. Do not bother about God. Because
ultimately, you cannot know. At least, practice morality. So, Buddhism created
a, a, it is, sometimes, people think, oh, Buddhism was atheistic. But Buddhism
is not atheistic. It is non-theistic. It just does not talk about God.
Subsequent teach..., teachers after Buddha made a, made up arguments, which
sometimes seem to reject God. But Buddha just did not talk anything about God.
He did not talk much about metaphysics. Because metaphysics or philosophy, we
cannot really talk about it without scripture, other, without scripture, how can
we know about higher reality? So, everything that we talk about higher realities
without reference to scripture will essentially be speculating. So, Buddha
refers that do not do any speculation, says, just do not bother about.
Practice morality. So, right conduct. Right thought. Right speech. And essential
part of that right conduct, right thought, right speech, is avoid violence. Do
not kill animals. And in this way, he brought people to a level of goodness. And
in, in that sense, it is not just non-theistic. It is pre-theistic. It is
creating a platform by which people can understand theism, understand God in a
proper way.

So, Buddhism spread very rapidly. And when it spread very rapidly because of the
charisma of Buddha and the appeal, historically speaking also, the brahmanas who
were doing karma kanda, they had become very materially minded. And they were
imposing their superiority on other castes due to which the lower caste became
alienated. And many people from the lower caste, they found that in Buddhism and
similarly in Janism, there is no caste discrimination. So, they took to Buddhism
and Janism. And this spread rapidly. That means, at one time, practically, all,
all of India, large parts of India were Buddhistic. And over a period of time,
in order to establish their own intellectual autonomy. That means to show how we
are different from the Vedic tradition, Buddhists wrote many arguments and
books, which exclusively criticised Vedas. And therefore, what was meant to be a
temporary program for, emergency program for checking people from doing
indiscriminate animal slaughter in the name of Vedas, became a whole scale
program against the Vedas. So, then, to get people back to the Vedic fold, Lord
sent Shankarach..., Lord Shankara, Lord Shiva as Shankaracharya. And
Shankaracharya basically did lot of debates. And he refuted the Buddhism. And he
brought India in the Vedic fold. But because Buddhism was talking, had
completely rejected the Vedas. So, he could, Shankaracharya could not give the
complete conclusion of the Vedas at that time. So, he gave a transitional
conclusion. So, Buddha was talking about sunnya. And Shankaracharya said, you
are attracted to Sunya? Actually, the same conception is there in the Vedic
literature. It is called as Brahma.

So, actually, if we look serious..., deeply from the conceptual point of view,
Buddha's Sunya and Shankaracharya's Brahma, they are intellectual clones.
They are basically so similar, just change the nomenclature and bringing the
Vedic framework, and essentially, both are similar. So, he was able to get
widespread acceptance of the Vedas and the Vedic culture by talking of the
impersonal level. At that time, people were not spiritually wide enough to talk
about the higher level of reality. So, and, Shan..., so Shankara's purpose is
both historical as well as in one level scriptural. So, his purpose historically
was to check the spread of Buddhism and get people back into the Vedic fold. And
from the scripture point of view, there is another purpose that is sawn. Padma
Purana gives a verse, a section, where Lord Vishnu is telling Lord Shiva to come
down to the world, and preach this impersonalism, Mayavada. And Sh..., Lord
Shiva is also telling Parvati:

        mayaiva kalpitam devi kalau brahmana-rupina
        mayavadam asac chastram pracchannam bauddham ucyate

"mayaiva kalpitam", by me, it is taught. Oh, devi. "kalau brahmana-rupina", in
Kali-Yuga, in the form of a brahmana, I teach "mayavadam asac chastram",
Mayavada, which is not the true scripture. It is false conclusion of the
scripture. "pracchannam bauddham ucyate", it is actually just cowherd Buddhism.
So, as I said, Shankara's Brahman is an intellectual cloak, clone of Buddha's
Sunya. Because even Buddha was asked. What is the ultimate goal? Then, there is
no scripture. There is no understanding of positive spiritual reality. So, like
I was talking about the origin, negative, zero, and positive. So, Buddha
basically, it takes people to the zero. The Upanishads take people to the zero.
But then from the negative axis through the zero, they take people to the
positive axis. But Buddha, because he had rejected scriptures. So, he could not
speak much about the positive reality. So, he could just take people to zero.
So, both, basically, Buddhism and Impersonalism focus on the zero. One is
through the Vedic fold. The other is, Buddhism is not through the Vedic fold.
Impersonalism, as taught by Shankaracharya and others, is in the Vedic fold. But
what is transitional, if it is made into final, then that becomes a disastrous
blender. So, Shankaracharya was told by the Lord to teach Mayavada because those
people who want defy God and still claim to be religious, Mayavada serves as a
very convenient cover for them. Because the people can, so, people can say that
I am God. Because ultimately, the Absolute Truth is formless. And in this way,
they can boost their false ego in the religious realm. The purpose of religion
is to give up our false ego. But the ultimate glorification for the false ego is
to say that I am God. So, actually speaking, that is not the conclusion of
impersonalism. Impersonalism is that material form is false. And we have to go
beyond this material form. And what is that beyond material form? That is not
very clearly talked about in the Upanishads. It is mentioned and further we have
to go to the Puranas, sattvik Purana, and ultimately, the Amala Purana,
Bhagavatam to understand that conclusion of personal reality.

So, in this transitional journey, if one stage is only taken, then it leads to
erroneous understanding. So, if let us have a long movie, in which the hero and
the villain are constantly at battle, and initially, in the first half of the
movie, the hero and the villain, whenever they are fighting, the villain is
constantly beating up the hero. Beating up the hero. Beating up the hero. And
then, at the end of the movie, the hero wins. And the villain is defeated. But
if somebody just takes one scene from the movie, the middle of the movie, where
the villain is just beating up the hero, beating up the hero, and he says this
is a teaching, this is what the movie depicts, the hero getting beaten. He says,
what kind of movie is this? So, we have to watch the movie to the conclusion.
Similarly, there is a historical masterplan of the Lord which spans over
multiple centuries starting from Buddha, and going up to Lord Caitanya. So,
Buddha, he starts the Vedic restoration process by at least getting people to
follow basic morality, stop animal slaughter. Even if for that sake, the Vedic
authority has to be temporarily rejected. Shankara gets people back into the
Vedic fold by teaching about Brahman which is similar to Sunya.

Now, after Shankaracharya comes Ramanujacharya. And Ramanujacharya says, that
actually, yes, everything is one. But there is difference also. So,
Shankaracharya, what he taught was Advaitavada. Shankaracharya got people united
within the Vedic fold, but by proclaiming impersonalism as the Vedic teaching.
And what is that? Advaita. There is no Dvaita. There is only oneness. But
Ca..., now, Shankaracharya's influence was so great. Shankaracharya's hold on
Indian society was actually stronger than so.., hold of science in modern
society. So, reject him entirely was not possible. So, Ramanujacharya said yes,
Advaita is there, but there is difference in Advaita also. He says
Vishishtadvaita. So, he th.., he countered Shankaracharya's arguments and he
gave an understanding that actually the scriptures do teach about relationships
also. So, the Supreme Lord is like the soul, and material world, and the jivas
are like the body. So, the soul and the body, they are one and they are
different. The body cannot exist without the soul. In that sense, they are
related. But at the same time, there is a difference. So, the soul is the b...,
essence. Soul is a soul. Soul is the sustainer. And the body is what, what is
subsequently coming out from it. So, like that, we have a relationship with the
Supreme Lord. And there is oneness. But there is difference. Vishishtadvaita.
That was his teaching. And this is a very simple understanding. It is very
profound and complex. We will not go into that right now. I am talking, right
now, for the historical flow. So, impersonalism, everything is one. So, then,
Ramanujacharya says, yes, everything is one. But there is difference also.

And then, Madhvacharya came along. And Madhvacharya says, where is oneness?
Actually, everything is different. He says, there is jiva, jagat and jagadish.
So, jiva, jagat, and jagadish. What is the relationship? So, he said, actually,
Madhvacharya said, what is the relationship? So, jiva, so, he says, jiva and
jagat are different. Jiva is soul. Jagat is universe. And jagadish is the
Supreme Absolute Truth. So, Madhvacharya says, what is oneness? He says, jiva
and jagadish is different. Jiva and jiva is different. Jiva and jagat is
different. Jiva and jiva is different means, different souls are different. They
are not one. Jiva and jagat, matter and consciousness, they are different. And
jagat and jagadish, matter and Supreme Lord, they are also different. So, he
says, where is oneness? Actually, there is bheda. There is actually duality. It
is not that there is oneness. So, in this, through this, Madhvacharya countered
Shankaracharya. So, if we consider Shankaracharya's teachings to be one extreme.
Vishishtadvaita comes back to the windstream towards the center. And
Madhvacharya takes them to the other extreme.

And then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu comes along. And Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gives
the, brings things back again in the balance. And He gives the highest
understanding. The whole understanding that actually the relationship between
the Lord, between the Brahman and the atma, is Achintya Bheda Abheda. So,
Brahman is just alternative word used for Jagadish. 21:20
