Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xHeAt1YHIWc
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=7ht2mN35cNL26rcYdBjtqc0y_Vh8MTU0MDEwMjU2MUAxNTQwMDE2MTYx&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_016_-_Sri_Isopanisad_Mantra_13_part_1_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=xHeAt1YHIWc&event=video_description

Hare Krishna.

So, we continue with our discussion on the Isopanisad. We are discussing about
sambhuti and vinasa. So, mantra twelwe said that when a person worships the
asambhuti, that person "andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti", goes into darkness. And person
who worships so called sam..., asam..., sambhuti, so called sambhuti, that means
a concocted conception of the Absolute Truth. That person goes into deeper
darkness. Now, this verse is going to contrast the two. It says one result is
obtained by worship of sambhuti, and another by the result of a..., by the
worship of asambhuti. So, let us lo..., look at this verse. So, it is said:

        anyad evāhuḥ sambhavād
        anyad āhur asambhavāt
        iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ
        ye nas tad vicacakṣire

So, "anyad evāhuḥ sambhavād", "āhuḥ" means it is said. Certainly, "evā", by them
it is said. "anyad", one, one particular. "sambhavād", by the worship of
"sambhavād", by the worship of the eternal, one result is obtained. 

"anyad āhur asambhavāt", by the worship of that, which is not eternal, some
other result is obtained. "iti śuśruma dhīrāṇāṁ", this is what I have heared
from the "dhīrā", "śuśruma dhīrā". "ye nas tad vicacakṣire", those who have
perfectly explained it. So:

"It is said that one result is obtained by worshiping the supreme cause of all
causes and that another result is obtained by worshiping what is not supreme.
All this is heard from the undisturbed authorities, who clearly explained it."

Who clearly explained it. So, now, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport.
So, basically, this, now, Srila Prabhupada is giving little longer purports, in,
for these mantras. So, there are sixteen paragraphs in this purport.

So, first thing Srila Prabhupada says is this verse clearly says different paths
lead to different results. One p..., one path, one result, another path, another
result. So, therefore "dhīrā" exposes folly of "all paths lead to the same
goal". And analysing this will be the main theme of the purport and the class.

So, after exposing the folly of that, then "dhīrā" teaches shastra. What does
shastra say? Different paths lead to different goals. So, we have to choose the
right path and then we get to the right goal.

Then, accept Krishna as sambhavat. So, what are, what are the paths now? One is
that we accept Krishna as the Absolute Truth. Then, what will happen? Yes.
This is what Arjuna did. And then Arjuna, what did Prabhupada say? He killed his
so called relatives to satisfy Krishna. That means for the satisfaction of
Krishna, one is ready to do anything. No. If somebody does not accept Krishna as
sambhavat. Then, the person may choose an entirely different course of action.
What is the course of action? People are my God, somebody may say. As we
discussed, mana seva, madhava sevaya. We will discuss elaborately. Or I am God.
That is Mayavada. Which we discussed earlier also. We will discuss it little bit
today also.

Now, hearing from "dhīrā" helps one and all to attain perfection.

So, let us look over these points now. Firstly, do all paths lead to the same
goal? We will look at this from a logical point of view, from the scriptural
point of view, and then from the practical point of view, the cultural point of
view. So, now, Srila Prabhupada standard example for refuting st..., this was
that if one sits, say, in Mumbai, one train is going to Chennai. Another is
going to Delhi. Another is going to Calcutta. So, now, will it be that all the
trains will lead to the same destination? No. Because actually they are all,
trains going in different directions. So, similarly, Srila Prabhupada says, how
can all paths lead to the same goal? These paths are different. And these paths
take people in different directions. The impersonalists may refute that this is
a wrong example because, actually, do you say the, do, do you think that the
Absolute Truth is limited, like one small place, like Delhi, or Calcutta, or
Chennai. The Absolute Truth is everywhere. The Absolute Truth is in Delhi also,
Calcutta also, Chennai also. So, therefore, this is a false example. Now, the,
when the impersonalists say like this, they are actually not understanding the
thrust of the e..., example. The thrust of the example is not whether the
Absolute Truth is limited or unlimited. The thrust is whether the, the path to
the Absolute Truth is a particular path or by doing anything in life, one can go
to the Absolute Truth. Just one have to evolve one's consciousness in a
particular way, so that one can go the Absolute Truth.

You know, for example, Srila Prabhupada was asked this question once in America
after University programme. Swamiji, I do not know the verse, but I have heard
that the Bhagavad Gita says whatever we do, ultimately, we will go back to God.
So, Srila Prabhupada replied, if whatever we do, we, we have to go back to God,
then why would God have to speak the Bhagavad Gita? We would do whatever we
wanted to do and we would go back to Him. But Krishna speaks Bhagavad Gita, in
which He tells this. If you do this, this will happen. If you do this, this will
happen.

        mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
        mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi
        atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān
        na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi

Krishna says if you become conscious of me, in 18.58, you will cross over all
obstacles by my grace. If, however, you do not become conscious of me, you will
be lost. So, Krishna is clearly telling two paths, two consequences. So, Krishna
does not teach this. So, yes, it is true that the Absolute Truth is unlimited.
But that does not mean whatever we do, we will go to the Absolute Truth. Why?
Because the Absolute Truth is perceived at a particular level of Consciousness.
The Ab..., if our consciousness is not tuned to that level, then although the
Absolute Truth is all pervading, we cannot perceive the Absolute Truth. So,
f..., there are three modes of material nature. There is ignorance, passion and
goodness. And beyond that, there is transcendence. So, only for consciousness,
and moving towards transcendence can we perceive transcendental reality.
Otherwise, transcendental reality will remain inaccessible to us. So, the thrust
of the example is not the nature of the destination. The, the thrust of the
example is the reality that different paths are going to take us to different
kinds of consciousness. And not all kinds of consciousness are equal when it
comes to perceiving, realising, or relishing the Absolu..., the presence of the
Absolute Truth. And this is not just based on logic. This is also based on
scripture. Before we go to scripture, to understand that the Absolute Truth is
ultimately a person. And when we talk about a person. When we want to go close
to a person, then there are certain things which we have to do. Now, if I
want to go clo..., become closer to my spouse, then I know what his or her likes
and dislikes are, and accordingly change my behavior. Similarly, the Supreme
Lord is a person. And relationships require commitment. Krishna is the Supreme
Person, then actually, if we people work so hard to try to win the favor of some
ordinary person. How much more we need to strive to win the, to c..., form a
relationship with the Supreme Person? Supreme Lord is very merciful, very
accessible. But still, He is a person. And He needs to, He needs to be
approached as a person. And approaching Him as a person means that we understand
what are His likes and dislikes, and act accordingly. Now, Krishna's likes and
dislikes are not arbitrary. At, as far as the principles of devotional service
are concerned, at least with respesct to purification of a consciousness from
the lower modes to the higher modes. What Krishna likes, it is also for our
ultimate good. That the more we do the things that are pleasing to Krishna, the
more we become purified, elevated. And we become happier. And ultimately, we get
liberated.

So, now, let us look at the scriptural refere..., now, it, the scriptures use,
if, if the scriptures are going to say that all paths lead to the same goal,
then the scriptures would not use repeated instruction by contrast. Instruction
by contrast means that the scriptures tell, if you do this, this will happen.
And that, that, that will happen. Now, thus, this has been done in the
Isopanisad itself. This particular mantra that we are taking. You know, it was
preceded by similar mantra earlier with respect to vidya and avidya.

        anyad evāhuḥ sambhavād
        anyad āhur asambhavāt

        anyad evāhur vidyayā-
        nyad āhur avidyayā

So, just like it was, here it was, sambhavat and asambhavat. So, the Isopanisad
makes it clear. If you do this, this will, going to happen. If you do this, this is
going to be happen. So, similarly, in the Bhagavad Gita, so many occasions. We
just look at a few occasions over here. So, in the third chapter and fourth
chapter, Krishna is talking about faith. And in 31, 32, He says, that if you
have faith, what will happen. If you do not have faith, what will happen. In 31,
He says:

        ye me matam idaṁ nityam
        anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ
        śraddhāvanto ’nasūyanto
        mucyante te ’pi karmabhiḥ

He says if you have faith in me and follow my instructions, you will become free
from all sinful reactions. Now, the other hand, in 32, He says:

        ye tv etad abhyasūyanto
        nānutiṣṭhanti me matam
        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

If you, if one is envious of me, one does not have faith in me, then whatever
knowledge one acquires, that will all be lost. Why? Because the consciousness is
misdirected. So, Krishna is clear in it, two paths, two consequences. And
similarly, 4.39-40 also, Krishna says something similar. In 39, first He says
what will happen by faith.

        śraddhāvāḻ labhate jñānaṁ
        tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ
        jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim
        acireṇādhigacchati

He says, if you have "śraddhā", "labhate jñānaṁ". You will get "jñāna". And
"jñāna" will lead to "parāṁ śāntim". "acireṇādhigacchati", you will get supreme
peace. And quickly you will get. Now, on the o..., on the other hand, He says,
if one does not have faith:

        ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca
        saṁśayātmā vinaśyati
        nāyaṁ loko ’sti na paro
        na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

He says that if one does not have faith, one will get happiness neither in this
world, nor in the next world. And then, after that, 11:38
