Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTqrV1WC850
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_056_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_54_to_59_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=fTqrV1WC850&redir_token=XOj6uf0fUjOVM492Lr7e-uroZ118MTU0ODQ4NzQwNUAxNTQ4NDAxMDA1

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. So, today, we s..., s..., continue with our second chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita. And we will discuss the last section. This last section is from
verses 54 to 72. While we move forward, let us look at the overview of the
second chapter. So, this chapter has a total of five sections. The first section
deals with Arjuna's further question and eventual surrender. That is verses one
to ten. Then, Krishna systematically answers the various questions that Arjuna
has raised, the various arguments that Arjuna has made against fighting. So,
11 to 30, Krishna gives atma-jnana. The soul is indestructible. Therefore,
fight. This counters Arjuna's argument of, you know, compassion. He says, how
can I kill my relatives? He says, you are not going to kill the relatives. Then,
31 to 38 talks about how you should fight. Because by fighting, you will get,
attain heaven. Or you will attain earthly rule. Either way, you will en..., you
will enjoy. This counters Arjuna's argument that I am not, be able to enjoy. You
know, 39 to 53, now, takes the discussion from f..., karma-kanda, which is
attaining of svarga. That was the discussion, 31 to 37. But now, it moves
forward to karma-yoga. Seek liberation. "padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam". So, this
counters Arjuna's argument of fear of sinful reactions. Because will you get
any sinful reactions if you kill your relatives? No. If you are doing it in the
mood of yoga. "samatvaṁ yoga ucyate" as we discussed yesterday. Then, you will
not get any sinful reactions. Now, after hearing this, Arjuna will get a
question. You know, who is this person who is a karma-yogi like this? "tadā
yogam avāpsyasi". Krishna has said. One who is not disturbed by anything that
is, you know, heard any promises of material enjoyment. What are the
characteristics? That is the question which Arjuna asks here. And then, Krishna
answers. And that is the last section. The characteristic of "sthita-prajña".
So, let us look at, let us start with this. So, when we look at the
characteristic of "sthita-prajña".

        arjuna uvāca
        
        sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā
        samādhi-sthasya keśava
        sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣeta
        kim āsīta vrajeta kim

So, "sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā". So, Arjuna has, asking a question based on his
own l..., level of thinking. So, Arjuna, of course, we know is a pure devotee.
But in this situation, he is o..., orchestrated by yoga-maya. And he is caught
up in bodily misconceptions, bodily misidentification. So, at this level, he is
primarily thinking, should I be fighting? Or should I not be fighting? So, he is
thinking, Krishna is telling about this person who is the "tadā yogam
avāpsyasi". Who is situated in samādhi. Who has attained yoga. Will such a
person be fighting or not fighting? What kind of person is this? So, as the,
that is why he is asking the characteristics of such a person. Generally, when
we hear something from, you know, someone. Especially, if we are hearing in a
formal setting, in a class. It is said that, at the most, the audience hears
twenty percent of what the speaker speaks. And God only knows which twenty
percent it will be. So, often, they hear the thing which either entirely agrees
with what they are speaking or radically disagrees with what they are speaking.
That is what jail, strikes in their mind. So, Krishna has spoken a lot in the
verses from 11 to 53. But Arjuna has primarily con..., should I be fighting? Or
should I not be fighting? So, of course, in 37, in 38, Krishna has clearly told
Arjuna, you should fight. 37 was "yogaya ucyas...". You, Krish..., 37-38 was you
should fight. And if you fight:

        tasmād uttiṣṭha kaunteya
        yuddhāya kṛta-niścayaḥ
        
That was 37. Therefore, arise and fight. And 38 also was, if you fight. You will 

        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

        tato yuddhāya yujyasva
        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

        ...yuddhāya yujyasva
        naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

But after that statement, in 37-38, from 39 to 53. There are several verses
which talk about mostly transcendence. Which talk about, not, there is no
explicit reference to fighting. So, along with that, there is a verse 49.
"dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma". Keep distant, keep aside abominal work. So, that
"avaraṁ karma", when Krishna is talking, He is referring to, you know, the
karma-kanda. Because that does not lead to the "varaṁ" of mukti. It does not
lead to liberation. But from Arjuna's point of view, killing one's relatives,
especially one's teacher, and one's grandfather, that is "avaraṁ karma". That is
inauspicious work. So, because in the last fifteen verses, last fourteen verses,
Krishna has not explicitly talked about fighting, so, Arjuna gets a question.
This kind of a person who is a yogi. Does that person, you know, will that
person fight or not fight? So, in that context, He asks this question. What are
the characteristics? Now, the question is interesting. "sthita-prajñasya kā
bhāṣā". What is the, you know, what is the language of such a person?
"samādhi-sthasya keśava". Such a person is situated in samādhi. "sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ
prabhāṣeta". How does such a person speak? "kim āsīta". How does such a person
sit? And how does such a person, "k...", "vrajeta kim". How does such a person
walk? Now, you know, these, if we just look at theses questions from external
perspective, this might seem like the question which are asked Mr. Universe
during a, a, his sport contest. You know, how does such a person sit? What is
the style of walking of a person? What is the style of the speech of a person?
So, now, Arju..., ila..., Arjuna is not interested in a, that sort of thing. So,
this is a serious philosophical questioning going on. So, that is why these
words are indicative of something deeper. So, "kim bhā...". "kim bhāṣā". "kā
bhāṣā". "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". These, in this context, are not to be taken literally.
So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana explains that "bhāṣā" refers to "bhāṣāte iti bhāṣā".
Th..., so, generally, we use the word "bhāṣā" to refer to language. That is
true. But the word "bhāṣā" has, like "bhāṣā". "bhāṣā" is a commentary. A
"bhāṣā". Like "Govinda Bhashya" is the commentary of Baladeva Vidyabhushana on
Vedanta-sutra. So, "bhāṣā" is said to be a commentary. And generally, "tikha"
is said to be a commentary on a commentary, a subcommentary. So, for example,
surrender unto me. It is like a commentary on Srila Prabhupada's commentary. So,
it wou..., we could call as tikha, subcommentary. Prabhupada's "Bhagavad-Gītā As
It Is" is a bhashya. So, it is a bhashya, or "bhāṣā". It does not only refer to
language. It refers to that which describes. And generally, how do we describe a
thing? With its characteristics. So, here, "kā bhāṣā" refers to what is th...,
how is this "bhāṣā" done of this particular person. What are the characteristics
of a person? And then, "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". That is referring to what is the manner
of speech of that person. And then, after that, "kim āsīta". How does such a
person sit? That refers to how does the person k..., regulate the senses and
keep them under control. So, sitting is a physical activity. But along with that
it refers to regulation, inactivity, self-mastery. So, how does such a person
restrain the senses? And "vrajeta kim" means, it is just not walking along a
fashion ramp. That is being talked about over here. You know, it is not a, the
gate of a person. It is, how a person moves around while being in the world,
filled with temptations. Filled with sense objects. How does such a person
operate? These are the four questions. And these four questions are answered by
Krishna in the next section. So, "kā bhāṣā". What is the characteristics? What
is the defining characteristic of such a person? That is answered in the 55th
verse, immediately, in the next verse. Then, "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". How does such a
person speak? This characteristic of speaking are answered in 56 and 57. And
then, "kim āsīta". How does such a person sit? You know, that is answered in,
fif..., from 58 to 63. How does such a person restrain the senses? And, you
know, how does such a person engage the senses? That is answered in 64 to 71.
"kim vrajeta". So, let us look at this one by one. Now, Prabhupada explains in
the purport. Prabhupada's, basically does not directly translate "bhāṣā" as,
"bhāṣā" as language. He gives us a symptoms or characteristics. And then, he
talks about rich person symptoms. Then, you know, sick person symptoms.
So, similarly, a transcendental symptoms. Let us see what K..., Krishna's answer
is.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        prajahāti yadā kāmān
        sarvān pārtha mano-gatān
        ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ
        sthita-prajñas tadocyate

Now, you know, we will see in this, these series of verses, Krishna uses various
words to describe that transcendentalist. But it is all talking about the same
person. So, here, the word, "sthita", "sthita-prajñas" is used. In a future
verse, "sthita-dhīr munir ucyate" will be used. So, we will look at these
different words. They all refer to the same person. But different attributes of
that preson can be understood by looking also at the describe..., description,
the name that is given by referring to that person. So, "sthita-prajñas". So,
actually, this verse, "sthita-prajñas" comes in this section of the Gita. But
after this, throughout the Gita, Krishna does not use the word "sthita-prajñas".
So, "prajñas" can mean, generally, means intelligence, wisdom, the faculty for
deep thinking. "sthita-prajñas". So, that is, the intelligence is fixed.
"sthita-prajñas". And what is the characteristic of such a person? Two
characteristics. "prajahāti yadā kāmān". "prajahāti" means to give up
completely. "kāmān". All desires. "sarvān pārtha mano-gatān". So, all these
"kāmā". How do they originate? "mano-gatān". And then, they are, or...,
originate from the mind. "ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ". Such a person is satisfied
within, by turning the mind inwards. Now, it is interesting that, normally, we
would think our, all our desire is to be happy. So, if somebody gives up all
desires. If that person gives up all desires. Then, that will also involve
giving up the desire for happiness. So, if we give up all desires, then how can
such a person actually be happy? So, that is the important word over here is
"mano-gatān". The, or, which kind of desires have to given? "mano-gatān".
"sarvān pārtha mano-gatān". "prajahāti yadā kāmān". So, th..., all the "kāmā".
That is originated from the mind. That they are given up. But the "ātma" is
a self-joyful. And when one situates oneself with the spiritual level, then
one experiences joy. So, that means, if we consider our three-level reality.
Three levels of existence. Th..., there is the soul, which is the spiritual
level. That is the mind, which is the subtle level. And we have our senses and
the sense objects, which exist at the gross level. So, normally speaking, the
soul's consciousness is rooted through the mind outwards through the senses to
the external world. And in the contact of senses and sense objects in the
external world, there is sometimes some pleasure. And often, there is pain,
also. So:

        prajahāti yadā kāmān
        sarvān pārtha mano-gatān

That means, the external senses that come. And so, external sense objects and
senses, which come con..., in contact with each other. The desire for that
contact and the pleasure thereof, that desire is rejected. And then, that
desire, there can be varieties of desires. I want to do this. I want to do that.
All those desires are rejected. "mano-gatān". But then, afterwards, "ātmany
evātmanā". So, with the "ātma", now, here, the word "ātma" is used twice.
"ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ". So, the mind, Prabhupada explains, thus purified, when
it is fixed in the self. Then, one gets happiness. "ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ".
"tuṣṭaḥ" means satisfied. This, the, so, the mind can be either looking ex...,
outward. Or the mind can be looking inwards. What do we mean by the mind looking
outward or inwards? As we discussed earlier, the mind is a route of
consciousness. Route. So, the soul is the root, root of consciousness. The mind
is the route of consciousness. So, now, when this consciousness from the soul is
coming outwards. At that time, through the mind, it can either go outwards
towards the external. But if we become introspective. That means we d..., direct
our thoughts inwards. When we direct our thoughts inwards, then we experience
an inner happiness by that. Because we, as souls, are spiritual. And as
spiritual beings, we are joyful, sat-cit-ananda. "ananda" is a characteristic of
the soul. So, the defining characteristic of "sthita-prajñaḥ", Krishna says, is
that such a person rejects external pleasures and rejoices in inner pleasures.
Such a person is "sthita-prajñaḥ". So, Srila Prabhupada explains very simply
what is the difference between a materialist and a spiritualist. He says,
materialist is one who seeks pleasure externally. And spiritualist is one who
seeks pleasure internally. So, you know, Prabhupada explains how the, all this
applies to devotees, also. Now, we may say we go to a temple. We take darshan of
the deities. So, the deities are external to us. The temple is external to us.
So, when we go there. Then, when do we kirtan, we are hearing sound. Which is
coming from the external soul. Some person is singing. Some person is playing
kartal, mrdanga. So, aren't all these also external pleasures? How are they
internal pleasures? Actually, yes. These may seem to be like external pleasures.
But they are external pleasures that take us inwards. See, there are external
things in this world which can take us further outward, outward, outward. So,
because if we are attracted to sense objects of this world. Then, those sense
objects do not have any intrinsic connection with us. So, that is why when we
get attracted to them, we go get further lost. We get further distance to and
alienated from our inner spiritual nature. But Krishna is present within our
heart. But that same Krishna manifests externally through various, you know,
spiritual sense objects. Various divine manifestations. So, deities. The holy
name. The mrdanga. So, all these are, in, you know, different ways and to
different degrees manifestations of Krishna. And when we focus our consciousness
on them, we may, it may seem like we are getting some external pleasure. Or
pleasure from an external source. But actually, the pleasure that comes is the
contact of the soul and Krishna. And the pleasure that comes thereof. So, that
same Krishna who is manifesting externally, say, as the holy name. As the deity.
That same Krishna is present in our heart. And when we contact Krishna
externally, we awaken spiritually. And the more we become awakened spiritually,
the more we can perceive and relish Krishna's presence internally. That is why
the happiness that we get in devotional service, w..., in the initial stages of
our spiritual life, we need external stimula for reminding ourselves of Krishna,
and for connecting with Krishna.

And of course, in the advanced stages, also, we still use the external
manifestations. We serve those external manifestations. We go and take darshan
of the deity. Because we love Krishna. So, it is the, but the important point is
the happiness that a devotee gets is not external. It is internal. Because it
is, ev..., even if there is an external factors involved, those external factors
lead us inwards more and more. So, in this way, a devotee turns from outer
happiness to inner happiness. And this is the defining characteristic for
"sthita-prajñas". So, the most important characteristic is where do we seek
happiness? If we are seeking happiness externally, we are materialist. So,
Krishna is telling Arjuna that no. This is "sthita-pra...", "sthita-prajñas".
Arj..., Krishna wants Arjuna to become a "sthita-prajñas" like this. One who
seeks happiness internally. Now, you know, many people think of internal in a
very simplistic sense. People think that, ok, whatever is inside me is internal.
And whatever is outside me is external. But this is a, is, this is a naive
idea. People say look within and find peace. But when I look inside, I find only
agitation. You know, this desire is there. This anxiety is there. This tension
is there. So, actually, if we think that what is inwards is spiritual. And what
is outward is as material. That is a simplistic understanding where we are still
considering ourselves to be the body. So, when I think myself to be the body.
Then, that which is outside the body is external. And that which is inside the
body is internal. But actually, inside the body, there is the mind. And there is
the soul. So, the mental is not spiritual. What is connected with the mind is
not spiritual. So, when I have to understand what is internal, what is external,
I have to understand with the reference point, not of the body, but with the
reference point of the soul. So, from the soul's point of view, the bodily and
the mental, both are external. That is why the desires that come up in the mind,
they may be inter..., internal to us from the body's point of view. But from the
soul's point of view, they are external. That is why Krishna is telling over here
"sarvān pārtha mano-gatān". When I have to look for happiness, that is not just
internal at the mental level. We have to look for happiness at the spiritual
level. So, "ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ". So, look at the pl..., for happiness, not
just internally. But in the internal at the spiritual level. Not at the mental
level. So, from the Bhagavad Gita's point of view, even the mental is external.
The mental is not internal. Although it may be internal from the body's point of
view. From the soul's point of view, it is external. And so, Krishna is telling,
therefore give up mental desires and turn towards Krishna. And find happiness
thereof. So, this is the first defining characteristic. Now, this is "kā bhāṣā".
The "bhāṣā". The cha..., defining characteristic for transcendentalist is seek
happiness internally, not externally. Then, after that, in the next verses,
Krishna will answer the question of how does a such person s..., speak. Let us
look at that. So:

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ
        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ
        sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

"duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ". "udvigna". "udvigna" means agitated or dejected.
"duḥkheṣv". So, when there is misery, one does not become dejected. "sukheṣu
vigata-spṛhaḥ". In happiness, one does not ge..., get more desires. Let me have
more. Let me have more. "vigata-spṛhaḥ". So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana and
Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura, they explain this in practicals. You know, they
say that, you know, if some, if as a renunciate, somebody goes to some..., one
goes to somebody's house. And that person gives a lot of opulent food to eat.
So, one does not become delighted, you know, by that and start soaring. Oh, may
you have a happy a family life. May you have this. May you have that. And if
somebody goes to somebody else's house. And that person just, you, beggar, get
out of here. I will curse you. No. He does not speak like this. He says, he
accepts whatever come.

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

So, it is interesting in this verse, you know, it is said that dukha and sukha
will be there. You know. For as long as we are in material existence, we will
get dukha and sukha. But generally, what happens when we get sukha? We desire
more of it. So, for example, you know, if something good happens to us. If
somebody starts praying us for something. Then, our desire becomes, oh, you
know. Speak more. Speak more. Speak more. Speak my glories more and more. We
may not speak it directly. But we feel like that. So, what happens when we g...,
anything gives us happiness? That generates desires. "spṛhaḥ". I want this more.
I want this more. Whereas when some misery comes to us, then we feel. Oh, why is
this happening? Maybe, I should not be doing this. "vigata". We become
"udvigna-manāḥ". But such a person is a, a transcendentalist is not affected
by this. So, now, if this is talking about speech. Where is the reference to
speech over here? Actually, as speech, is determined by our thoughts. So, this,
Krishna will answer the question of speech in the next verse. But, you know,
Krishna tells that, first of all, you know, we are not just talking abou...,
Krishna does not talk a..., about a spiritualist, or a "sthita-prajña",
"sthita-dhīr munir" as doing some just superficial changing of speech. There are
some people who will just decide, you know, I will speak in a very sweet and
polite way. Internally, they feel, you know, I want to beat you to death. And
externally, oh, you are such a nice person. Thank you for your help. Whatever
corrections you have told me, they were very good for me. I will do them. So,
sometimes, you know, there are some people who, who gets so frustrated with
their bosses that they keep some boxing bags in their home. And they punch them.
And they think they are punching the face of my boss. So, in the material life,
there is lot of duplicity. Internally, we feel one way about the person. But
externally, we feel differently. But Krishna is telling. He will talk about how
the person "kiṁ prabhāṣeta" in the next verse. But before He speaks about that,
He say, talks about the mentality of that person. What is that mentality? That
actually, when happiness and distress comes, one is not unduly excited or
agitated by it. So, you know, many times, we may not speak externally. But our
mind is speaking internally. For example, in the morning, the alarm clock ring.
Then, the alarm clock is ring, ring. It is saying wake up. But then, internally,
the mind is saying, you know, go to sleep. So, we are not phy..., hearing it
physically. But we can all hear the mind's voice. So, Krishna is telling that
the, what is, should be, we have to, the, for the transcendentalist, the mind's
voice itself has changed. So:

        duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ
        sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

Then:

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ

So, this "rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ". This sat..., same, this same line, which is here
in 2.56C will again come in 4.10. Krishna tell, tell over there:

        vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā
        man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ
        bahavo jñāna-tapasā
        pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

4.10A comes over there. So, there, we will discuss it in much more detail. And
Prabhupada gives a very interesting explanation of what "rāga-bhaya-krodhā"
refer to. Here, Srila Prabhupada explains that a devotee stays fixed in the
spiritual path, in the path of devotional service, irrespective of what happens.
"rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ". So, Srila, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport in
this case. So, first of all, there is "sthita-dhīr munir ucyate". So, Prabhupada
explains what is a "muniḥ". So, first po..., po..., point is, you know, first
three lines, Prabhupada is explaining what is a "muniḥ". A "muniḥ" is that
person who can agitate the mind in various ways for mental speculation without
coming to a factual conclusion. So, there, basically, "muniḥ" is a speculator.
So, there are people who try to infer, you know, ok, this happened. What is the
cause of this? So, there was a f..., there was a fruit on a bi..., a tree. And
then, a bird came and tuck, and set on a branch. And then, the bird flew away.
So, now, at that time, the fruit also fell off. So, now, some observer,
speculator starts thinking, actually, because the bird came and set on the tree,
that is why the fruit fell. Or because the fruit fell, the bird got frightened
and the bird went away. Or, the two are unrelated. Or, the fruit's presence
attracted the bird. But when the fruit fell, the bird got frightened. And the
bird went away. You know. Or, or the bird came. And that is why the branch could
not hold the weight. And then, when the branch was shaking, both happened. The
bird got frightened and flew away. And then, the fruit also fell. So, now what
is the actual reality? 25:21
