Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Js3Y1tGHlgY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=C58BIRmaWbX7u-tg1i7_T3wFU4p8MTU0ODQ4NzE0NkAxNTQ4NDAwNzQ2&event=video_description&v=Js3Y1tGHlgY&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_048_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_01_to_05_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to the Bhagavad Gita, Chapter Two. So, at the end of the
Chapter One, Arjuna has put aside his bow.

        visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ
        śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

He is holding his head in his hands. His head is lowered. And his
"śoka-saṁvigna". His mind is filled with misery. "mānasaḥ". "śoka-saṁvigna",
with moroseness, with lamentation. And he has told through his actions to
Krishna that I will not fight. So, that is the end of the Arjuna Vishada Yoga.
Now, the second chapter starts. The second chapter has been named differently by
different acharyas. Sankhya Yoga is one of the standard names. Because sankhya
is what is talked about, at least in the initial parts of the chapter. And
sankhya essentially un..., involves analysis, analysis of existence into various
elements. So, the analysis of the existence into, basically, matter and spirit,
into our life, into body and soul, our being into material and spiritual sides.
So, Bhaktivinoda Thakur has said that the second Chapter has the whole Gita in
nutshell. And that is why he uses the name "Contents of the Gītā Summarized".
So, Prabhupada uses that name for the second chapter.

Let us look at the overview of second chapter. And then, we will move forward.
So, the sections can be divided into five. The first section is "Arjuna's
further doubts and surrender". So, Arjuna, you know, expresses one more reason.
That is indecision. And if we l..., because, you know, I am undecided. So, let
me just not take the more aggressive course of action. Let me not fight. Then,
Ar..., when Krishna, Krishna, He is basically using various reasonings to Arjuna
for fighting. So, first is, in 11 to 30, he says jnana. What is "jnana"?
It is Knowledge. Fight. So, using jnana, fight. As the soul is eternal,
compassion for the temporary body is ignorant and useless. So, here, He cou...,
counters Arjuna's compassion argument. First argument was, oh, how can I kill my
relatives? He felt compassionate for them. Second argument was, based on
enjoyment. So, in 31 to 38, is karma-kanda. So, that is the first application of
atma-jnana. Atma-jnana is I am not the body. I am the soul. So, when we
understand that you are not the body. You are the soul. That means you will
continue to live after you die, also. And if you act according to dharma, then
you will get elevated destination, go to svarga. By doing your prescribed
duties, you will enjoy. So, dharma has to be done to get kama and artha. So,
therefore, he says that, you sh..., if you want to enjoy also, only by doing
dharma, you will enjoy. And in this way, He counters Arjuna's enjoyment
argument. And then, further, there is a third argument, is about Nishkama Karma
yoga. Thi..., in the Nishkama Karma yoga argument, Krishna basically focuses on
Arjuna's concern that there will be suffering because Arjuna will be subjected
to sinful reactions. So, Krishna tells him that if you act in Nishkama Karma
yoga, then you will be doing activity which will bring no reaction. And when
there is no reaction, then there is no sinful reaction also. So, that is the
la..., next part. So, in Nishkama Karma yoga, that is second application of
atma-jnana. It is one level higher. If you really understand you are the soul,
then the goal is not to go to svarga. The goal is to go beyond material
existence to eternal spiritual existence. And for that, you will be, be not
attached to anything material. So, fight with detachment, then there will be no
sinful reactions. So, this counters Arjuna's sinful reactions argument. And
then, when he is talking about a person who is detached from everything
material, for that, Arjuna asked, who is that kind of person? I want to know
more about that person. Then, Krishna gives the characteristics of that person.
And there, that is the last sections. Characteristics of a sthita-prajna. So,
basically, in this section, Arjuna's three arguments, compassion, enjoyment and
sinful reactions is in one way countered. Now, the arguments will, the argument
about "kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti", that destruction of family tradition will, will
be countered in the Third Chapter. And Arjuna's next last, fifth argument is
indecision. Which he will make in this Chapter. That will be countered by the
end of the Bhagavad Gita when K..., Arjuna expresses his decision. He gives up
indecision, expresses decision. I will fight. So, let us look at the chapter
now. It starts with:

        sañjaya uvāca

        taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam
        aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam
        viṣīdantam idaṁ vākyam
        uvāca madhusūdanaḥ

So, "taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam". "taṁ", unto that person. Who is that person? The
previous chapter ended with the description of Arjuna. Arjuna had sat down.
05:20
