Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQfosyif6tE
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_055_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_47_to_53_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=PQfosyif6tE&event=video_description&redir_token=O2Nx8BeU-dnr3SuzgLQxD0uotrF8MTU0ODQ4NzM3N0AxNTQ4NDAwOTc3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We will
look f..., to discuss now on karma-yoga. Till now, we have discussed the
superiority of karma-kanda over karma-yoga, from verses 38 to 46. Now, we will
discuss how, you know, karma-yoga is to be practiced. Now, in this section, we
can see this discussion in the chronological flow of the Gita as talking about
karma-yoga. At the same time, these characteristics can also apply to
bhakti-yoga. So that we get an eternal result that it requires one-pointed
intelligence. This can apply to general transcendence. And it can also apply to
bhakti-yoga. So, within the k..., a, sequential flow of the Bhagavad Gita.
Because Krishna has not explicitly referred to Himself. It refers to karma-yoga.
But Srila Prabhupada connects everything in the Gita with its ultimate
conclusion. And in that perspective, all the section can be seen as referring
to Krishna Consciousness, also. So, we will discuss about this topic more in
detail as we move forwards. Now, let us look at the one of most widely quoted
verse in the Gita. It is a verse which is often quoted, but very rarely and
clearly understood. So:

        karmaṇy evādhikāras te
        mā phaleṣu kadācana
        mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr
        mā te saṅgo ’stv akarmaṇi

Now, this verse, generally, only one fourth of it is quoted. "karmaṇy
evādhikāras te". But it has four parts. Actually, each of the four parts has a
significance. "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". That we have a right only to do karma.
We have a right to do karma. "adhikāraḥ". Authority. Right. "mā phaleṣu
kadācana". But we do not have a right to the fruit. We should not demand or, you
know, we should not demand the fruit. "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr". One should
not think of oneself as the producer of the fruit. And then, "mā te saṅgo ’stv
akarmaṇi". We should not think that, you know, because I have not, I ha..., I
should not get the fruit. So, then, I will not do karma only. So, let us look at
these four parts and try to understand what this verse is actually talking
about. So, first and foremost, Srila Prabhupada would often talk about half hen
logic based on a well-known traditional story. That a person wanted a hen.
Person want..., b..., l..., about had a hen which could give an, eggs, golden
eggs. That person thought, oh, the tail part of the cow and he is giving eggs.
The front part does not give anything. I have to feed it. So, let me just cut
off the front part. And then, the hen was killed. And then, there were no eggs
at all. So, like that, if we just take half of the hen, then we do not get
proper results. So, what does this half-hen refer to? If you only take from the
Bhagavad Gita, those sections, which are conducive to us. You know, and not
conducive in the sense that they are at our level of spiritual advancement. But
which simply fit into our world view. And we reject those which do not fit into
our world view. Then, we miss out on much of what the Bhagavad Gita can offer
us. So, what are the things that Bhagavad Gita can offer us? It can offer us an
a..., all-round elevation in our understanding of ourselves and God. And our
relationship with Him. So, that understanding in come only when we open
ourselves. So, half-hen logic means only accepting one part, one part of the
hen. So, actually, with respect to the Bhagavad Gita, you know, people often use
not just half-hen logic, with respect to this specific verse. But there is what
we could say even quarter-hen logic. Quarter-hen logic means, this verse has
four parts. But most people only quote one part. "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". So,
you know, "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". I have a right to do my work. So, actually
speaking, what is it, verse actually talking about here? So, if we look at the
flow of the Gita previously. Essentially, Krishna is talking seek the eternal.
Do not seek the temporary. He has not explicitly stated that. But He has talked
about the eternal, the soul, in 2.11 to 30. And then, He has said, ok, d...,
now, we d..., we detach from the material. That is what has been the theme from
2.38 onwards. "sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā". So, that means, you are the eternal
soul. And everything material is superficial. So, do not be eq..., only, excited
about that. Be equipoised amidst happiness and distress. And then, after that,
He talks then about the superiority of this over seeking materially good things.
So, now, He is describing how one, we should live, by which one can attain that
eternal. So, let us look at the four parts.

First is "karmaṇy", "karmaṇy evādhikāras te". That all of us have a right to do
the work. What does it refer to? Actually, most people think that we have a
right to the results. We do not care whether we have a right to the work or
not. We care for the result. Like students, often, they do not want to study.
But they want to get good marks. And that is have their all of kinds, you know,
gui..., study guide, which are said last minute revision, last minute study. And
they say, oh, this you study and you will, you know, get the top marks. Or
people also feel that. In general, people think I have a right to the results.
And I, and, with the least possible effort that I can put in, and I can get the
results. That is great. Few people think that I have a right to the work. But
Bhagavad Gita seems to say the exactly opposite. You have a right to the work.
But do not, you know, do not consider that you have a right to the fruit. What
does it actually mean? See, work is performed in the world, not just for its
material results. But also for its spiritual results. How can work produce any
spiritual results? It depends on what kind of work it is. If one is just doing
one's own activities, not according to scripture, but according to ordinary. You
know, wordly standards of what is right and what is wrong. Then, one will just
continue at ordinary worldly level. But if one understands spiritual knowledge
and tries to practice spiritual knowledge. Then, one understands that I am the
soul. And I have to raise to the level of the soul. So, how will I raise to the
level of the soul? By purifying myself. What does it mean to purify myself? It
means that the soul is sat-cit-ananda. And everything that causes the soul to
forget its sat-cit-ananda nature, is in one sense impurity. Now, those are which
are gross, very sensual, gross, gross sensory, or immoral pleasures. They are
considered to be a, very impure. And from the spiritual point of view, they are
extremely anti-spiritual. They choke and check our spiritual life. But beyo...,
or, so, when we say that we have a right to the work, which is like when a
student studies. The purpose of the study primarily is learning. And then, a
byproduct of learning is good performance in stu..., exams. So, the purpose of
study is what? Learning. It is inner growth. And, and actually, when we apply
ourselves to study, it is not just that we learn the subject that we are
studying. Actually, by that, even our mind grows. Even mind, by mind, I am not
referring to the aspect of the, the mind as we use it normally. We use the word
mind often to refer to that part of our, you know, being, which is always very
restless. Which is always filled with feelings. And which drags us down. But the
world mind is also used in a general sense in today's society. Where people will
say that Einstein was the greatest mind of the twentieth century. So, mind
refers to the faculty for deep thought. Which we have. So, when we talk about
this, we have to clearly understand that, you know, by studying, a person
develops th..., the thinking capacity, the reasoning capacity, the grasping
capacity, you know, and, of course one gets a deeper understanding of subject.
And all this, as a byproduct leads to the acquirement of good marks.

Similarly, when we work in this world. When we do our spiritual duty. Or, we do,
or do our worldly duties with a basic spiritual understanding of life. Then,
that enables us to grow in our inner understanding. That enables us to develop
our knowledge. So, when I, I act with detachment, then by that action, my
understanding that I am not the body, I am the soul increases. How is that?
Because there is action. And that action leads to transformation internally. So,
the purpose of an action primarily, when one is practicing yoga, is not just
acquisition of the fruit. The purpose of action is the growth of widsom. So,
when a person acts in knowledge, then the knowledge deepens further. So, when a
person, brahmana performs the brahmanical duties. Or ksatriya performs ksatriya
duties. Then, you know, now, naturally, when they work, obviously, they are, you
know, they hav..., every work is done with some result. It is objective. You
know, so, now, "mā phaleṣu kadācana". It does not mean, this verse does not mean
that one not care for the result. So, for example, now, when we are, you know,
assembling for this Bhakti Shastri course. Now, if we start thinking, you know,
I do not care whether I understand the Bhagavad Gita or n..., not. "mā phaleṣu
kadācana". You know, or, if we are cooking prasad for, you know, you know, for a
big festival, Janmashtami festival, say. And if the cook says "mā phaleṣu
kadācana". I do not care for the result. So, whether the sugar tastes good or
not. Whether sweet tastes good or not. Whether puris are half-fried, or properly
fried, or overfried. I do not care. "mā phaleṣu kadācana". And is that a correct
understanding of the Gita? You know, if that were what Krishna meant. Then,
Arjuna could have said, you know, I will fight. "mā phaleṣu kadācana". Whoever
wins, I do not care. So, that is a very simplistic understanding. And actually,
it is not our understanding. It is misunderstanding. So, "mā phaleṣu kadācana"
means, does not mean that one should not care for the result at all. Actually,
for most of us, it is the desire for the result that motivates us. And that is
not wrong essentially if we seek a particular result. But the idea is, we do our
duties, not just for that result. We do our duties because we know, through
that, we will get purification and illumination. So, when a coo..., a devotee
cooks for Krishna, now, when all of us are coming for studying the Bhakti
Shastri. What is our goal? By this, we want to become purified. By hearing
Krishna Katha. By understanding Krishna Katha. You know, by trying to
internalise it. You know, we become, then, we get these two results. One is
purification. And the other is illumination. Purification means all the
impurities subside because we are coming in contact with Krishna. Illumination
means our spiritual understanding also i..., you know, increases. So, this is
what we primarily seek when we do our services. So, when we take darshan of the
deities. When we cook. Yes, we want to get the good, we want to get things
cooked well. Because they are for Krishna. That is true. But that is not our
primary objective. Our primary objective is to please Krishna. And Krishna is
pleased, not just by our results. Krishna is pleased by our endeavor. So, if we
pu..., we do our service wholeheartedly. Then, even if the result does not come
out, Krishna is pleased. So, essentially, now, I have talked a, talked of
working at three different levels. First is the way most people work to get the
results. Why does a student study? Oh, I want marks in my exam. So, why does a,
why do we as devotees distribute books? Because we want our name to be
announced. Top distributor in the temple. Like that. So, we do it straight for
the results. Second is we do it because it will purify us. You know, I am doing
service, it will purify me. That is a good. Highest motive is, I do this because
I want to please Krishna. Now, among these three levels of motivations, if we
see. If I do the activity just for the sake of the results. Then, if I do not
get the results. Why should I do? I either do it. I simply wasted my time on all
this. That is how we feel. Why did I waste my time like this? And even if I do
it, you know, always, the thought is, oh. Will I get the result? Will I get the
result? Will I get the result? So, then, our consciousness is not really very
spiritual. But then, when we want to do it for purification, that is good. You
know, you understand. Why am I doing this activity? Because I will get purified.
So, when we give class. When we hear a class. Now, we do have, after this Bhakti
Shastri course, we will have exams. And there will be marking system. And
different devotees will get different marks. Someone will come first. Someone
will come second. Someone may even, came, come last. So, is this necessarily
bad? No. We can have marking system. But our goal in studying Bhakti Shastri is
not just to get marks. Our goal is to purify ourselves. We understand that by
giving serious thought on Krishna's message as it is sys..., systematically
presented through the Bhakti Shastri books. We will become purified. So, this
motive also frees us from dependence on the results. And that is actually very
liberating. If whatever we do, is simply dependent on the results, then it
creates a lot of insecurity. Will I get it? Will I not get it? Will I get it?
Will I not get it? So, if we do not want that sort of insecurity, then it is
important for us to recognise that there is, be..., there are better things that
we can do in life. That we just do not have to let our mental energy to get
sucked up in, you know, bothering about whether we will get the result or not.
We use it, our mental energy to o..., offer the result to Krishna. And do our
endeavor for Krishna's sake. That means that Krishna, whatever I am doing, I am
cooking this for your pleasure. You know, so, when we think of it this way, and
do it this way, then irrespective of whether that result comes out o...,
wonderfully or not. You know, some..., we decide to share Krishna's message. And
sometimes we go out and distribute hundred books. And sometimes, even two books
are difficult to be distributed. So, it does not matter. Because in all
situations, we are actually pleasing Krishna. If our endeavor is wholehearted,
we are pleasing Krishna. So, here, when Krishna says, you have a right to the
work, but not a right to the result. That does not mean that we do not care
about the result. Or we do not strive to produce the result. But our primary
motive is not acquiring the result. Our primary motive, at the level of
karma-yoga, is purification. At the level of bhakti-yoga is pleasure of Krishna.
This is we, how we understand this. Ka..., if, if my, if my goal is just the
material result, then I cannot have spiritual consciousness. And if I cannot
have spiritual consciousness, then I cannot make spiritual advancement. Now, why
cannot I have spiritual advancement when my goal is the result? Because if my
goal is just the result, the, then I will constantly be thinking about the
result. I cannot think about anything else. And that makes me weak.

Then, "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr". So, then, you know, if I do not want to be
weak in terms of not being overcome by the craving for the result. There is one
more level of detachment. First level of detachment is that I do not, so, I do
not become a..., attached to the result. I do not become emotionally dependant
on the result as the motivation for my action. But after that, it is also "mā
karma-phala-hetur bhūr". Do not think that you are producing the result. "mā
karma-phala-hetur bhūr". Do not think that you are the cause of the result. Now,
how is that possible? You know, a cricketer may say that in the last ball, we
needed six to win. And I hit a sixer. I won the match. You know, I am, I am the
champion. You know, I did it. I, so, the student may say, you know, I had to
give a class. And I gave the class. I prepared for class. I am the "mā
karma-phala-hetur". If I had not done it, the result would not have come. So,
how can somebody say that do not think that you are the cause of the result?
See, Krishna's message is very, you know, profound. And what we have to
understand is when He says "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr" means that do not think
that you are the only cause of the result. We will discuss about our action in
more depth later. But the important point to recognise here is that all of us,
we want results. But at the same time, deep within, we know that the results are
not entirely in our hands. Even in sports. You know, sports, where we see that,
the players' performance matter so much. You know, the, say, the batsman has
said, hits a sixer in the last ball or the white bowler gets a clean bowl in the
last ball. You know, it depends on the performance. But even the all best
cricketers and cricket fans know that there are factors which are beyond human
control, also. And they all play a role. And there are many cricketers who have
their own set of superstitions. You know, some cricketers, you know, they just,
there wa..., was a famous cricketer, who would, whenever he, he would play, he
would have a particular red-colored handkerchief. You know, coming out one third
from the pocket. And he always look. If there, handkerchief is too much inside,
he considers that is bad luck. If the hors..., handkerchief is too much outside,
that is also bad luck. If the handkerchief is not there only. That is s...,
super bad luck. And he would not that, as long as the handkerchief is one
third outside, red-colored handkerchief. Oh, oh, now, that is a good omen. Or
there are some, some other cricketer. Or, he had the idea that, you know, when
he would go out to play, you know, he would tell others. He would go before that
to the washroom and make sure all the lids of the washroom, a, the commodes
would be closed. And he said, if any lid would be open, and he would tell his
team members. You know, make sure everything is closed. He says, you know, what
is the correlation between b..., b..., batting over there and the, whether the
commodes are closed or not. Or some other player, they would wear some amulet,
something in the arm. Somebody, there was a famous tennis player who would have
an earring only in one ear. You know, he says, this is a good luck charm. Now,
we may say, this is all, you know, as superstitious. Now, oh, if we look at
these players, they are not foolish. They may act, may be acting foolishly in
certain ways. But the point is these are all their ways in which they are
recognising that, you know, there is something beyond their control. And that,
which is beyond their control needs to go their way for the results to come out.
So, when we say that there is, they are not foolish. That, that means that they
also know that, their performance matters. They, you know, that is why they are
playing. And they know that their performance matters. But they also know that
there is something beyond their performance which also matters. So, there are,
there is the, the way, people may use the name the destiny, faith, chance,
whatever. There are different names that can be used to refer to it. But the
simple fact is, there are factors beyond our control which matter. And they
matter a lot. So, when we recognise how much they matter. Then, we get the
betus, the motivation to find out what they are. And then, to see how we can
align ourselves with them. So, that is a different subject entirely. It is not
that the idea of superstitions, superstitious sort of activities, those higher
powers, or whatever is there, factors beyond our control, they will align with
us. That is not the point here. The point is an acknowledgement of factors
beyond our control. So, when Krishna says "mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr". His point
is that do not think of yourself as the only cause of the result. Recognise that
there are other factors involved.

So, to the extent we think that we are the cause of the result, to the extent we
will become bound. And to the extent we do not think of ourselves as the cause of
the result, to the extent, we will not become bound. "mā karma-phala-hetur
bhūr". So, you know, that means, these two levels of detachment are. First is do
not work just for the sake of the results. And by working, do not think that I
am the cause of the results. So, if I think I am the cause of the results, then
I identify myself with the specific ability, the specific talents that I have.
So, if I think that I am a, if I give good classes. Then, I start thinking of
myself as a preacher. And then, that is an identification. Which is different
from my identification as the servant of Krishna. So, of course, I am in...,
doing the service of preaching. And in that sense, I am a preacher. But I 
have to remember primarily that I am a servant of Krishna. So, in this way, by
this inner consciousness, one can stay detached. One does not think oneself
23:0
