Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a8bhW4CtXSM
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=a8bhW4CtXSM&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_043_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Verse_01_to_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=y9wrHnuouoi5Z8jxtqlg2ANpj9t8MTU0ODQ4Njk0OUAxNTQ4NDAwNTQ5

Hare Krishna.

sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita class. Today, we will begin with the
Bhagavad Gita, from, starting from chapter one onwards. And our goal will be to
try to complete the Bhagavad Gita in hundred classes. That will be approximately
seven verses per class. But because the first chapter does not have so much
philosophy, we will go a little faster in the first chapter. And then
afterwards, we will go little more slowly. So, let us begin with the first
chapter. Before we look at the first chapter, let us just have a look at some
general principles for understanding the Bhagavad Gita. So, these are broad
features of the Bhagavad Gita. Now, the Bhagavad Gita is often known as a
yoga-shastra. So, we discussed briefly the position of the Bhagavad Gita. Now,
from the Gita Mahatmya point of view. So, let us look at it further.
Significance of the Gita is that, it is Shruti in the Smriti. So, technically
speaking, it can be classified as Smriti. Why Smriti? We discussed in our
Isopanisad classes that there are two categories of Vedic literature, Shruti and
Smriti. So, the Vedas and the Upanishads, which are a part of the Vedas. The
Vedas have four parts. Brahmanas, Aranyakas, Upanishadas, and Samhitas. So,
those are the parts of the Vedas. So, those Vedas are considered Shrutis. That sound
vibration which is directly received from the Absolute. And Smriti refers to
that sound vibration when it is understood, internalised and expressed by the
great sages. Shruti is about hearing. Smriti is about... Shruti is about hearing
and transmitting. Smriti is about h..., after hearing, smriti, meditating,
contemplating, remembering, internalising, realising, and then expressing. So,
some people consider Smriti to be lower than Shruti. Because the Smriti is said
to be not the direct revelation of God. But it is the understanding of the
acharyas, understanding of the sages. That is true in one sense from the
technical perspective. But scripture is not just a book of body that is s...,
mere anthology of text. It is a symphony of revelations. That is past not just
through the medium of the texts, but also the medium of the hearts. So,
scripture is understood through not just the text, but also the examples of
those who are living according to text. So, therefore, the Smriti is actually in
many senses considered to be more important because there the scriptural wisdom
is made accessible, made comprehensible, is made relishable by the realisations
of the great sages. So, therefore, Smriti is not really lower. In fact, there
are scriptural statements which also say that without studying the Smriti,
Shruti cannot be understood. The education of Shruti is not complete without
education of Smriti. So, so even if we from a technical point of view say that
Smirit is lower, but still if we look at the definitional point of view, from
that point of view of textual classification, the Bhagavad Gita comes in the
Smriti as it is mentioned over here. That is in the Mahabharata, the Bhisma
Parva, the Sixth Parva, which is the, of the Mahabharata. And in that, it is in
chapter 25 to 42. Now, there are two primary renditions of the Mahabharata. And
in some chap..., some sections of Mahabharata, the chapters 23 to 40 also. But
the point essentially is that, the, it is eighteen chapters from the Mahabharata
within the Bhisma Parva. And within the Bhishma Parva, when it is positioned
over here, the important point to understand is that from the definitional point
of view, the essential definition of Shruti is that which is the word of God.
And Krishna Himself is God. So, Shruti refers to that which is the word of God,
which is heard by the stages. And Bhagavad Gita is the word of God, which is
heard by Arjuna, which is heard by Sanjaya, which is heard by Dhritarashtra. So,
it is, it is also Shruti in that sense. So, Shruti within Smriti. So, w...,
although, in the Prasthana Traya. In the Prasthana Traya, "traya" refers to the
three pillars of establishing authoritative teachings, Shruti, Smriti and Nyaya.
Bhagavad Gita comes in the Smriti. That is how the acharyas explained it. But
still, the Padma Purana does say that the Bhagavad Gita is the essence of all
the Upanishads. And in that sense, it is of critical important for the overall
internationalisation of the message of the scriptures.

So, now, let us look at some further features of the Gita. We see here, st...,
look at, look at, we will look at statistical features of the Gita. That means,
statistical features means, from, from the point of view of, what may, how many
verses are about what topics. So, in the Bhagavad Gita, there are 575 verses
that are spoken by Krishna, "sri bhagavan uvaca". Then, there are 83 verses
spoken by Arjuna. And most of Arjuna's verses come in Chapter One and Eleven.
And the remaining verses, all of them, there are just 28 verses in 12 other
chapters. And in some verses, there are no, in some chapters, there are no
verses by Arjuna. And Sanjaya s..., San..., speaks 41 verses, which are mostly
in chapter one, and other chapters also, "sanjaya uvaca" also comes in two,
eleven and eighteen. And Dhritarashtra speaks one verse which begins the
Bhagavad Gita. So, in this way, the 700 verses are there. Now, sometimes we say
that the Bhagavad Gita is spoken by Krishna. Which is true. But now we will see
over here by, from this numerical point of view that 125 of these verses are not
spoken by Krishna. So then, is it correct to say that the Bhagavad Gita is
spoken by Krishna? So, Baladeva Vidyabhushana analyses this. And he explains
that just as, he gives, he gives it by proximity shapes quality. So, he says
that, the essential message of the Gita is the message that Krishna has given.
And everything around that is just the context that immediately and powerfully
brings out the relevance, the necessity, the importance of that message. So,
because Krishna's words are transcendental and the surrounding words of the
Gita, which preface, or which succeed Krishna's verses, they are, provide the
context of a proximity to Krishna's wo..., words. They also acquire
transcendental characteristic. So, in the technical point of view, they are not
sp..., remaining 125 verses of the Gita are not spoken by Krishna. But from the
overall point of view that they also contribute to the transmission of Krishna's
message. So, they are also set to be in a sense potent, in a sense
transcendental. So, we consider the recitation of the whole Bhagavad Gita
purifying. It is not that when "dhritarashtra uvaca", oh, Dhrtarastra, or the
attached person. So, if I say Dhrtarastra and I recite his verse, I will not
become purified. Oh, I should only find out which verses in the Bhagavad Gita
"sri bhagavan uvaca". And I will recite only the verses. I will not recite other
verses. No, this is parochial attitude. This is a short sighted attitude because
we, we understand that Krishna's words, the purification is not just the recitation.
Yes, recitation is extremely important for those who are inclined to do it. And
all of us can recite verses for purification. We will discuss in the seventeenth
chapter how Krishna says this one of the austerities of speech, by which our
speech becomes austere and pure. But along with that, Krishna also wants to
convey meanings. And the meanings are understood with the context. That is why
we consider the recitation of all the verses of Gita purifying. So, so it is not
in a technical sense that Krishna spoke all the seven hundred verses. But in the
overall sense, all the seven hundred verses contribute to the meanings spoken
by, the essential message spoken by Krishna. Now, same applies actually to
Srimad Bhagavatam also. It is not that whole Srimad Bhagavatam was spoken by
Sukadeva Goswami. Sukadeva Goswami in fact appears in the Second Canto, First
Chapter. Or rather, his first verse appear in the Second Canto, First Chapter.
He appears in the last Chapter of the First Canto. That is 19th Chapter. And
then after that, he starts speaking in the next Canto. But still, the point is
that because it all, the, what has been spoken earlier is contributing to the
message. So, therefore, it is said the whole Srimad Bhagavatam is spoken by
Sukadeva Goswami. Sometimes, it is said. Now, when Krishna speaks, He covers a
wide variety of topics in the Bhagavad Gita. And His purpose is to establish the
best sadhya and the best sadhna, the topmost sadhya, the topmost sadhana.

Another feature of the Gita is that there are many names which are used to
address. And Arjuna is addressed by over twenty other names. And Krishna is
addressed by thirty-three other names. So, this indicates, the names indicate
various specific significant points. That means the acharyas explained that in a
particular context, when a particular name is used, that context helps us to
understand the significance of that name. But beyond that also, overall, the
context helps us to, the names indicate the personal nature of the
reciprocation. You know, if both of them are just es..., temporary
manifestations of Brahman. So, I am Brahman. You are brahman. And all names are
illusion. Then, there is no need for one Brahman to refer to another Brahman by
so many different names which are all basically forms of illusion. And
the purpo..., the, especially, this will be all the more true, when the
discussion is based on talking about how to go from illusion to light. "Tamaso
mƒÅ jyotir gamaya", that is the Upanishad's di..., message. And that is
demonstrated in the Bhagavad Gita. Because Arjuna is overwhelmed by illusion.
And Krishna helps him come out of illusion. So, this indicates the personal
nature of the relationships even in transcendence. Now, why is the Gita called
the yoga-shastra? So, yoga-shastra, it is often called.

        tahad viti yo adyaha

So, we say at the beginning of the Gita. And:

        ata
        
So and so:

        ata
        
So and so, then:

        yoga shastra

We say. So, the word "yoga" comes again and again in the Bhagavad Gita. The word
"yoga" appears 78 times in the Bhagavad Gita, and in 15 of the 18 chapters. So,
only chapter 1, 15 and 17 is the word, Bhagavad Gita, not, yoga is not present.
And if we look at variants of it, then the way, yogi is found 28 times. And
yukta is found even more, 49 times. So, 78, plus 28, plus 49 becomes 155. So,
the word appears a huge number of times in the Bhagavad Gita. Now, if we
consider 155 out of 700, it is almost, it is more than 20 percent. So, this,
more than 20 percent of the Gita's verses have the word yoga or its related
form. So, directly also, by seeing how repeated the word yoga, repeatedly the
word yoga comes in the Bhagavad Gita, we can understand that it is a book about
yoga. And if we look at, f..., not just the numerical frequency of the words,
but also the essential meaning of the message, then we see that the message is
all about yoga. The message is about a connection. Yoga co..., is related with
the word yuja. Yuja means to connect. And the whole point is to connect the Soul
with the Supersoul. Connect the atma with the Paramatma. So, and there are, the
Bhagavad Gita analyses various meanings for this connection. And it ultimately
concludes by talking about how the means of bhakti is the best. So, it analyses
various forms of yoga, and establishes of bhakti yoga is the highest, the best
way to connect with Krishna. So, when we talk about the Bhagavad Gita, we are
talking about the yoga-shastra. And if we look at the context also, Arjuna was
right next to Krishna. You know, Krishna was a charioteer. Arjuna was the
chariot warrior. And the charioteer and the chariot warrior were a team. And
they were in the same chariot. So, although they were there, what ha..., and
they were there together for one mission. So, initi..., initially, there was
yoga in their intentions, in their mission. Both of them were there to fight a
war. But when Arjuna saw, saw the warriors. Then, we will see what happened
after that in the first chapter. But basically, that perception created a
viyoga. There were vi..., there was yoga. But there came viyoga. Viyoga means
separation. Separation was not physical. Both of them remained in the same
chariot. But the viyoga was in terms of emotions, was in terms of conceptions,
was in terms of intentions. So, Arjuna became overwhelmed by come..., by, by
emotions of grief and apprehension, over whether I should fight or not. And
his conception became largely body based. And because of that, he lost. The
clarity of purpose which could have helped him to move forward q..., well. So,
this was a viyoga and by the words of Krishna to Arjuna, at the end, again yoga
came. Again yoga came up means, again both of them became one in intention. It
was "kari·π£ye vacana·πÅ tava". That is the conclusion of the Bhagavad Gita from
Arjuna's decision point of view. So, Krishna concludes his speech in 18.72. And
there He asks Arjuna, so, has your illusion gone now?

        kaccid etac chruta·πÅ pƒÅrtha
        tvayaikƒÅgre·πáa cetasƒÅ
        kaccid aj√±ƒÅna-sammoha·∏•
        pra·πáa·π£·π≠as te dhana√±-jaya

So, oh Arjuna, have you heard attentively? Has your illusion been destroyed? Has
your doubts gone away now? So, and what is Krishna, Ar..., Arjuna replying? Yes,
he says.

        sthito ‚Äôsmi gata-sandeha·∏•
        kari·π£ye vacana·πÅ tava

He replies in 18.73 verse that yes, I am situated in diminishion, and lacked, as
I, my doubts are gone. And I will act, do as you act. So, what has happened? The
yoga has happened again. So, in this way, from the numerical frequency point of
view, from the essential message point of view, and from the bracketing context
point of view, all these we see that the Bhaga..., from all these perspectives
that the Bhagavad Gita is the book about yoga. It is a yoga-shastra.

Now, moving forward, let us look at the chapter one overview. So, here, we have
46 cha..., verses in the chapter. And in these 46 verses, basically, two themes
are discussed. For as we see, 1 to 26 verses is observing the armies. And 27 to
46 verses is Arjuna's lamentation. So, accordingly, this chapter has been named
by different Gita commentators in different ways. So, Srila Prabhupada follows
one tradition of commentators, who focus on the first part. And then, the name
is Sainya viriksha yoga, observing the armies in the battlefield. And another
name, which is used by another set of acharyas, another set of Gita
commentators is Arjuna Vishada Yoga, the yoga of lamentation. The, the yoga of
A..., Arjuna's lamentation. So, Arjuna Vishada Yoga or Sanyan Vikshan Yoga. Now,
among both these yogas, the essential point is the same. It is the s..., s...,
setting up of the background, or the context, or the immediate impetus for
Krishna to speak His message. Now, in the original Mahabharata as it was written
by Vyasadeva and in the Mahabharata that we get today, the, the chapters do not
have any titles. That is why different chapters are given different titles. In
fact, the Bhagavad Gi..., Mahabharata's nomenclature is also different. And that
is why sometimes the same, n..., not, not no..., not in nomenclature, but its
numerology, how its numbering system is also different. And that is why the same
chapters can be referred to by different ways. So, it is in this Parva. It is in
this s..., then the sub..., in this Parva, there is this Chapter. There is this
verse. Or there can be other ways of referring to it also. The Mahabharata is so
vast that accessing its message is often complex in terms of references. But the
essential point is that acharyas depending the Gi..., various Gita commentators
depending on the focus of their presentation have named the Bhagavad Gita
accordingly, named the Bhagavad Gita's chapters accordingly. So, among these two
Sainya Viriksha yoga and Arjuna Vishada Yoga, and we have to clearly understand
that when Krishna spoke the Bhagavad Gita, or Arjuna started speaking, you know,
A..., Krishna is not going to say that, that, say at the end of a particular
chapter, ataha, ekadasho adhyayah. He is not going to start a chapter by saying,
now, I am going to speak the eleven chapter. No, the Bhagavad Gita is a normal
conversation. So, it is a live conversation that happened. And then that
conversation is contextualised. And, and to create some reference points for,
for categorisation, then the chapter divisions are made by Vyasadeva. And the
chapter divisions are subsequently named by the various Gita commentators,
according to the focus of their presentation. So, observing the armies in the
battlefield. That is the name that Srila Prabhupada chooses for Chapter One.
Now, we will see prepar..., now in this, there are, in the first 26 verses, we
can divide in three sections. First is, des..., description of the preparations
for war. Then, that is 1 to 13. Then 14 to 20 is, there are signs of victory for
the Pandavas. And then after that, there is Krishna exhibiting role, his, His role as
Bhakta-Vatsala by obeying Arjuna over there. And then after that, 27 to 46 is
Arjuna's speech in which Arjuna expresses his Vishada, his lamentation. And he
gives four reasons why he will not fight. So, those are reasons: compassion,
enjoyment, fear of sinful reactions, and distraction of family traditions. So,
let us look at each of these one by one when we come to it. But we will begin
with the first chapter, as first verse. So, we will recite the verse briefly.
Then, we will discuss it.

        dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra uvƒÅca
        dharma-k·π£etre kuru-k·π£etre
        samavetƒÅ yuyutsava·∏•
        mƒÅmakƒÅ·∏• pƒÅ·πá·∏çavƒÅ≈õ caiva
        kim akurvata sa√±jaya

So, "dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra uvƒÅca". So, how is the Bhagavad Gita being spoken? The Bhagavad
Gita is featuring dialog at two levels. First is the dialog between Krishna and
Arjuna, which has not yet begun. But this dialog between Krishna and Arjuna is a
part of a narrative that is told by Sanjaya to Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra. Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra is
blind and so he, although war is there, he does not go to fight in the
battlefield. And the war is primarily between his sons and the sons of Pandu.
So, he is eager because his sons are involved. He is eager, anxious to know what
is happening on the battlefield. So, he, before the war started, he was given
the darshan of the virata rupa of Krishna. When Krishna came to Has..., came to
Hastinapur as a santidut, as a peace messenger, but was ripped off, and rejected
by Duryodhana. And who even, Duryodhana even tried to arrest Krishna at the
time. Krishna exhibited the virat rupa. And then, the spell binding vision, all
the soldiers who had come to attack him fell in fear and fled. And at that time,
Krish..., you know, Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra said please allow me to see. And then,
Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra got the vision at that particular time of Krishna's virat rupa. Then
after that, so that was the only time when Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra actually saw with his
eyes. So after that, when Sanjaya, when the war was about to became, Vyasadeva
came. Now, Vyasadeva in a sense is the father of, he is the grandfather of the
Pandavas and the Kauravas. It was through Vyasadeva that Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra was born.
So, the lineage is that the Pandavas are the, like the younger generation, the
current generation. Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra is the older generation. And Dh·πõta..., so,
Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra was older generation. So, if we consider third generation from the
Pandavas. First, second. Pandavas were first, second, third. So, above that,
generation was, there was Vicitraveria, Vicitrangada. And there was Bhishma.
These three were in that generation. So, Vicitraveria and Vicitrangada, they had
passed away without begetting any offspring. So, therefore, and, and Bhishma who
was there in their darshan, had taken a vow of celebacy. So, now, for this
dynasty to continue, and for the Kingdom to have a ruler, a new King had to be
est..., new was needed. And for that purpose, there was a, the request by
Satyavati to her son before wedlock. That was Vyasadeva. So, if you go one
generation above. That means, there is Pandava generation. Above them is the
generation of the, now, Dh·πõtarƒÅ·π£·π≠ra. Above them is the generation of
Vicitraveria, Vicitrangada and Bhishma. Now, above them is the generation of
Shantanu. So, Shantanu, he was attracted to Satyavati who was a, was a fisher
woman. And through her, he begot Vicitrangada and Vicitraveria. Now, before his
attraction to Satyavati, you know, he had been attracted to Ganga. And Ganga
had been his wife. It is a long story. But not going into the full story right
now. But through, through Ganga, he got seven wives who Ganga actually sent into
the ocean, tr..., driven to the river. Because they were cursed to have take a
birth on the earth. And then, the earlier they died, the earlier they could be
reinstated in heaven. But the eighth son when he was born. The son, Shantanu
could not tolerate. And he said, no, no, no, do not, how can you be so cruel,
how can you kill your own child? And Ganga had taken a pledge from him that, you
know, you will not question my actions. If you question my actions, then I would
go away. So, at that time, because he q..., he questioned her, he said, you
know, her that I will go away, and I will take your son with you. But I, when he
is older, I will bring him back to you. So, that eighth son who had survived was
Bhishma. So, now, Bhishma had taken a vow of celebacy. And afterwards through
Satyavati, through Satyavati, he had begotten further sons. But Satyavati, so
that means in this fourth generation, we have, we have mult..., we have, we
should understand there are different people. There are three people basically.
Satyavati, we have Shantanu that is the king over here. On one side of Shantanu,
we have, we have Satyavati through whom, he has begotten various children. Now,
Satyavati before her marriage, she was a fisher woman. So, she would also, has a
boat woman. You know, her father had asked her to, to take travellers across and
earn piety by that service. So, she was taking Parashara Muni. And Parashara
Muni saw at that time that the very auspicious time 27:14
