Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4rwG5u9AM3M
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_049_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_06_to_12_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=dPq2UTKsGWNA1qYXvanyK_W0uAt8MTU0ODQ4NzE3OUAxNTQ4NDAwNzc5&v=4rwG5u9AM3M&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita course. Today, we are discussing
the Second Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. And we completed first five verses.
Where we discussed about the spiritual and the current socio-cultural meanings
of the word arya. And then, we discussed about the reasons why Bhīṣma Pitamah
did not fight, did not protest against Draupadī's being dishonored. And then, we
are, are, we are right now discussing the fifth reason of Arjuna for not
fighting. The first four were compassion, enjoyment, sinful reactions,
destruction of family traditions. Now, he is, he, Krishna tried to give Arjuna
peptalk saying that, come on, do not be weak like this. Be a man. Fight. But
Arjuna counters back by saying what kind of man can raise weapons against his
own teacher and his own grandfather? I cannot do that. Better that I live as a
beggar. So, although, Arjuna says that, I, I, it is better to live as a beggar.
Actually, he had said that twice. You know, 2.5, he said this. And before that,
in 1.44-45, also, he said the same thing. Actually, it will be better for us to
live by begging. But now, he says that, actually, I am not sure what we should
do. That is the verse which we start from today.

        na caitad vidmaḥ kataran no garīyo
        yad vā jayema yadi vā no jayeyuḥ
        yān eva hatvā na jijīviṣāmas
        te ’vasthitāḥ pramukhe dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ

So, "na caitad". "etat", "na", "ca". We certainly do not know. "vidmaḥ". I do
not know. "kataran no garīyo". "kataran". We, we do not know which is, "garīyo"
is better, which is better. "yad vā jayema". Whether we should, we should attain
"jaye". "yadi vā no jayeyuḥ". Or we should not attain victory. That they attain
victory. Either we win or we will lose. But, so, normally speaking, there is a
battle. You would say now. If there is a sports match. Whi..., which captain
will say before the match? I do not know which is better, whether my team wins
or the other team wins. He will say, obviously, your team wins. What is the
big, what is the figuring out to be done about, for that? He says, no. That is,
issue is not so simple over here because "yān eva hatvā na jijīviṣāmas". If they
die, "yān eva hatvā". "na jijīviṣāmas". I will have no desire to live. "na
jijīviṣāmas". "te ’vasthitāḥ pramukhe dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ". So, those who have no
desire to kill, they are here, right in front of me to fight with. And
therefore, the issue has become so very complex. So, now, Arjuna has, actually,
essentially, three options. So, one is, if he wins. If he fights. Actually, he
has two options with the consequences. These two options are, one is fight. Or
he does not fight. Now, if he fights, there are two options within that. If he
fights and wins, then, he has killed his relatives. And he will not be able to
enjoy. Because whatever he has got is tainted by the blood of his own loved
ones, his venerable elders. And then, second, if he fights and if he loses.
Then, he will lose his life. But he is not really concerned about losing his own
life. He is concerned primarily, if he fights, he has really not thought about
whether he wins or loses, whether, the possibility of losing. But another option
is that, if he decides not to fight. Then, the only alternative that he has to
live like, live by begging. And that is actually very disgraceful option for a
ksatriya to do. Now, Arjuna is not really just concerned only about the
disgrace. He is thinking about the duty, also. So, Krishna has told him that it
will be "anārya", Ar..., "anārya". "asvargyam-karam". "akīrti-karam". So, it will
be dishonorable for your family and race. It will not lead you to heaven. It
will lead you to infamy. So, he is confused now. So, what should I do? So, in
today's language, Arjuna sees before him a lose-lose situation. If I do this,
also, I will lose. I have to do that, also, I will lose. So, what should I do?
If there is nothing that I can do to mitigate the situation. Lose-lose. That is
what he feels. So, therefore, he is saying, I do not know what to do. How should
I move forward? And, then, when he thinks like this, that I just do not know
what to do. This is actually the beginning of intelligence. You know,
intelligence means to know what to do when we do not know what to do.
Intelligence means to know what to do when we do not know what to do. So, if I
do not know what to do, then how will I know what to do? Actually, it means that
when we do not know what to do, you know, when we look up, we feel there is
nothing I could have. Look around, I do not see anyone there. Look back. That is
not an option. What do I do? Look up. Look up means pray. Pray. Seek guidance.
Seek help from the Supreme Lord. And when we do that, then, it, it is not that we
may have the opportunity to directly hear from Krishna. But Krishna is present
in our heart. And Krishna is present in the world through guru, sadhu, shastra.
So, Krishna will guide us. That is what we have to do. So, now, Arjuna has come
to a moment where he is frozen by indecision. And as he is frozen by indecision
in way, this way, he starts thinking. What should I do?  And he realises, I do
not know. So, what should one do, one, when one does not know? Turn upwards.
Turn towards God. So, normally, we will turn upwards. But Arjuna is so fortunate
that that Supreme Lord who stays high up in sky, in the spiritual world, he is
right next to him. So, Arjuna turns towards his charioteer. He is not his
charioteer. He is the Supreme Lord. And he says, Krishna, I surrender to you.
Please guide me. That is the next verse. So:

        kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ
        pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ
        yac chreyaḥ syān niścitaṁ brūhi tan me
        śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

So, "kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ". So, "kārpaṇya" is "krpana". "kārpaṇya" is
miserly weakness. So, Arjuna had, earlier being referred to:

        klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha
        naitat tvayy upapadyate
        kṣudraṁ hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ
        tyaktvottiṣṭha paran-tapa

So, you are very weak. So, the same point, Krishna, Arjuna is now acknowleding.
Yes, I have become weak. "kārpaṇya-doṣa". Because of weakness, I am overcome.
"opahata-svabhāvaḥ". So, my "svabhāvaḥ" is become overpowered. I have got
ove..., with the characteristics of a weak person now. And such a situation,
"pṛcchāmi tvāṁ", I ask you. "tvāṁ dharma". I ask you about what is my duty.
"dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ". "sammūḍha-cetāḥ" means my intelligence is bewildered.
My consciousness is deluded. And what am I asking you? "yac chreyaḥ syān
niścitaṁ brūhi tan me". "śreyaḥ". I want to know what "śreyaḥ". Now, actually,
Arjuna has himself said what "śreyaḥ". He has said earlier "śreyo bhoktuṁ
bhaikṣyam apīha loke". Just two verses earlier in 2.5. I, I think, it is
"śreyaḥ", better for me to beg. But he says, no. He says, really right? The
Kauravas have done so much wrong. And it is my responsibility as a king also to
act. What should I do? Just completely undecided. So, he says, I do not know
what is "śreyaḥ". So, please tell me, what is actually the long-term good for
me. "syān niścitaṁ brūhi". Tell me of, tell me of, what, what, what is for
certain. My mind is going on this track at one moment, that track of the next
moment. And as it is going on all these multiple track, it is leaving me
undecided. So, "śiṣyas te ’haṁ". I become your disciple. "śādhi māṁ tvāṁ
prapannam". "śādhi" means instruct me. And I surrender unto you. "prapannam".
"śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam". This is a very important verse in the Bhagavad Gita.
And Srila Prabhupada's purport for this is also a classic purport. So,
Prabhupada's pur..., purport focuses mostly on the theme of perplexities. You
know, material world puts us in perplexities. Should I do this? Should I do
that? What, what should I do? When we are put into perplexities like that, we
just do not know, how should I act? How, how, how? So, then, we just do not know
how to act. At that time, it can be a very demanding and draining, you know,
situation, emotionally as well as physically. We feel all our energy is being
sucked down. So, at such times, when we, when we have to work our way up, how do
we do that? We do that by turning towards God. So, he says, please instruct me.
So, Prabhupada c..., says that, the perplexities just come by their own. We do
not want those perplexities. Whether just as the forest fire comes by friction
inadvertently. Similarly, perplexities come in this world. And a wise person is
one who knows how to deal with them. And how does one know? By surrendering to
God. How does one surrender to God? By surrendering to a spiritual master. So,
"śiṣyas te ’haṁ". I surrender to you. So, many times, people say that, we know
the Bhagavad Gita. Yes, we may intellectually know. But truly we know, when we
L..., turn towards the Gita with the desire to do the will of the Lord. As long
as we are not desi..., having that desire to do the will of the Lord, till that
point, our knowledge will remain theoretical. And we may say that, I do not
know the will of the Lord. Yes, that is fine. And that is why the shastra is
there for us. You know, shastra gives us overall guidance about what are the
situations in which different devotees have acted in different ways. And based
on that, we learn what the will of God will be for us. And when we do the, when
the broad situations are, will of God, then gradually, then in specific
situations also, we will be able to do the will of God. I mean, generally, the
will of God is that we be Krishna Conscious. We avoid immoral activities. We
will do those things, gradually, in specific situations also, we come to the
know the will of God. It takes time. But that is revealed to us over a period of
time.

Now, "śiṣyas te ’haṁ". I have become your disciple. Prabhupada writes in the
purport about how there are, there is "kṛ...", brāhmaṇa and kṛpaṇaḥ. "brāhmaṇa"
is a person who is, lives in such a way as to seek the Absolute Truth. And
"kṛpaṇaḥ" is a person who lives in such a way a..., as to, very short sighted,
just wanting quick gains, not thinking of anything long-term. Any, we, we should
live as "brāhmaṇa"s, not "kṛpaṇaḥ"s. So, that is related with the point of
"śreyaḥ". All of us knew the "śreyaḥ". And what is miserly weakness? That is
attachment. Attachment to one's family and relatives based on, based on bodily
conception. You know, the bodily conception, when we are attached. Then, it
leads to bondage. It leads to suffering. It leads to, you know, complications in
life which need, one needs to rip..., pull oneself away from so that one can
focus on God. So, Arjuna is now overcome by bodily attachment. And he is unable
to think of what is right and what is wrong. So, now, is bodily attachment
wrong? Now, if, if we are, cannot, seeing our relatives as parts of Krishna.
And we are seeing ourselves as devotees of Krishna. And then, we are serving
them, and loving them. Then, that makes the attachment spiritual. And that can
help us go closer towards Krishna. But attachment at the bodily level can cause
a lot of suffering. And it causes bondage. Because we get sucked in it. And then
we forget our higher spiritual opportunities, the inevitable destruction of
relationships that are going to be there at this level of reality. And, the, you
know, opportunity that we miss for turning towards Krishna and loving Krishna.
So, when acting at the material level completely seems to be futile. Whatever I
do, it is a lose-lose-lose situation. That is the time when you start thinking.
You know, what should I do now? And that is the time when our enlightenment
begins.

        śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

That that is the time when Arjuna, who has put this "śiṣyas", he becomes a
disciple. So, for us, as devotees, Prabhupada would often say that we all need a
spiritual master in our life. And now, of course, we all have our spiritual
master. And we may feel that, yes, I have. But, you know, how many times can I
turn to my spiritual master for guidance? See, it is not just the spiritual
master. The spiritual master is not just a person. He is definitely a person.
But it is also a principle. And that principle is, spiritual master is
guru-tattva. He is a representative of Krishna. And when you start following the
process of devotional service. Krishna manifests to us, Krish..., through the
spiritual master, and Krishna manifests us through sadhu, shastra, through the
other devotees, through, through the Supersoul in the heart. But this is, this
act of surrender is very important for us. Because it is the beginning of our
serious search for God. So, Arjuna is, of course, a pure devotee. But by the
arrangement of the Lord, he is being put into yoga-maya. So, when earlier we
said that, oh, Arjuna saw with the eyes. And because of pratyaksha, he came into
yoga-maya. That means that actually, he came under the process of, under maya.
The point here is that it even that, he is observing with the eyes and then
coming into illusion. That is for us to learn. That how a person comes under
illusion. But essentially, what is happening to Arjuna is the will of the Lord.
Now, moving forward, Krishna may say, Arjuna, we are friends. You should, there
is no need for us to change that relationship. If you want some guidance, you go
to some other people. You go to Vyasadeva. He is a great sage. Or you go to
other people. Why are you coming to me? Or, you know, actually speaking, you
just win the war, and then you will forget all this misery. So, it, we may, one,
we may try some solution at the material level. But that does not work. So,
then, he says, you know, the, he says, nothing else will work for me.

        na hi prapaśyāmi mamāpanudyād
        yac chokam ucchoṣaṇam indriyāṇām
        avāpya bhūmāv asapatnam ṛddhaṁ
        rājyaṁ surāṇām api cādhipatyam

So, "na hi prapaśyāmi". I am not able to see. "paśyāmi", see. I am not able to
see how an..., anything else, anything material can solve my problems.
"mamāpanudyād". How it can be driven away. "yac chokam ucchoṣaṇam". This
"śokam", "chokam" is, "śokam" has changed to "chokam" because of the sandhi rule
of sanskrit. So, that is very related to the word, very similar sounding to the
word "choke" in English. So, "śokam", "chokam", chokes. So, "yac chokam
ucchoṣaṇam". So, that "śokam". What is it? It is drying me up from within. And
what is it drying up? It is drying up my "indriyā"s, "indriyāṇām". So, when a
person is in great tension. What happens is, if we listen, the stomach is
roiling. You know, the stomach has been boiled into some bit. The muscles are
grinding. The, my, as Arjuna has said, you know, my limbs are quivering. My
throat has dried up. This is, everything is dried up. Actually, you know, "yac
chokam ucchoṣaṇam indriyāṇām". So, at a, a physicochemical also, when our
emotions become very intense, the fuel content of the body decreases. So, we
feel that "indriyāṇām". "ucchoṣaṇam". I am, I am completely being sucked up by
the grief. And "avāpya bhūmāv asapatnam ṛddhaṁ". Even if I get a "bhūmāv". I get
a kingdom. How Lord? Without any "sapatnam", "asapatnam" means without any
enemy..., enemies. And for a king, actually, there are multiple enemies,
multiple problems. There may be enemies who may attack. And the king has to
defend all in fear. But he is talking about dream material situation. Where he
says, "asapatnam", there are no enemies. And not only that, "ṛddhaṁ".
"asapatnam", there will be no enemies. But nature may act as an enemy. And there
may be drought or famine. And then, the kingdom is in trouble. But he says,
"ṛddhaṁ". So, there is no enemies, also. And there is no natural problem, also.
Natural disasters, also. So, that is, it is a prosperous kingdom. So, he is
actually envisioning a situation that will be a dream situation for a king. Even
if I get that, "rājyaṁ surāṇām api cādhipatyam". So, even if I get some "rājyaṁ"
like that. And not only like that, even if I get a "rājyaṁ" like that of the
devatas. "surāṇām api cādhipatyam". That means even if I get a kingdom
equivalent to heaven, even that will not help. That will not dry up the grief.
See, we exist, our existence currently is three dimensional. You know,
we generally say two dimensional, material and spiritual. Which is true. But
within the material, there are two dimensions. Within the material, there is the
emotional. And there is the physical. So, in this way, phy..., spiritual,
emotional and physical, these three levels of existence are there. So, often,
most of the time, we are thinking of physical protection, physical
gratification, physical titillation. You know, people say, "rautika pramakand".
You know, we are fuled for the food, clothing, shelter. These are important. No
doubt. These are important. No doubt. We need them for a, at a physical level
for survival. However, at an emotional level, things are also very, you know,
intense. You know, if somebody, maybe, you know, maybe very comfortably situated
physically, with respect to food, clothing, shelter. But if that person is
having some emotional trouble. You know, somebody's abusive relative is there.
Or a exploitative boss is there. Or some tormenting misunderstanding with
one's spouse is there. Or some gen..., intergenerational conflicts between
parents and children is there. Then, that emotional conflict can be so
tormenting that the physical comforts do not, be any comfort. So, Arjuna is
saying that, actually, I am tormented at an emotional level right now.

        yac chokam ucchoṣaṇam indriyāṇām

And when I am tormented at the emotional level, a physical gratification cannot
solve the problem at an emotional level. What does it mean? Actually, you know,
a problem needs a particular solution. If I am hungry, you know, then, sleeping
on a comfortable bed cannot solve the problem. So, the, in the Citraketu
Maharaja's pastime, it is said that, although he had such a huge, flourishing
kingdom. But because he did not have a child. It all felt like, you know,
garlands of honor being offered to a starving man. But if that person is
starving, everything else is made irrelevant as compared to the fire that is
burning in the stomach. So, that way, when a particular problem is there 20:13
