Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QeSvVJ62F40
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=QeSvVJ62F40&redir_token=htxe24ZTcl7Iy26chcNFsIScnWt8MTU0ODQ4Nzc2OEAxNTQ4NDAxMzY4&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_067_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_40_to_43_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
coming to the end of the third chapter. We are discussing the last section, the
answer to Arjuna's question. What is it that causes one to act sinfully even
against one's will? So, we discussed Krishna's answer that it is lust. And
then yesterday, we concluded with how lust is situated in the body, the mind, in
the mind, the senses, and the intelligence. Let us look at that theme further.
And then, after that, we will discuss the verse, next verse. Let us look at this
verse once again. You know.

        indriyāṇi mano buddhir
        asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate
        etair vimohayaty eṣa
        jñānam āvṛtya dehinam

So, you know, it is interesting that, maybe, we can understand that, ok, the
lust is situated in senses, in the mind. But why is Krishna saying that lust is
situated in the intelligence? Normally, we would expect that, the intelligence
is what? You know, freeze us from lust. Or intelligence is what, is what?
Enables us to see the danger of lust. And, you know, try to free ourselves from
it. So, why does Krishna say that lust is situated in the intelligence, also?
Actually, some, in many s..., cases, lust takes over the intelligence. And then,
after that, in..., intelligence, instead of using, being used to curb lust, is
used to fulfill lust. So, reg..., yes..., we discussed earlier about, say,
internet. There is g..., you know, there is filth on the internet. And to put it
there requires intelligence. But that intelligence is used to perpetuate and
propagate illusion, not to e..., el..., li..., eliminate illusion. So,
intelligence can also become, you know, perverted by lust. And when that
happens, then that person can become extremely dangerous. Because that person is
not just, you know, you know, you know, impelled by whimsical passion, impulses.
But there is a, there is a methodical madness that comes up in the person. So,
for example, there are some people who may be like serial rapists. So, very
brutal kind of people. But then, they make a plan how to, you know, catch their
victim and then brutalise the victim. So, there, the lust is actually, that
person is acting intelligently. But that intelligence is made perverted. So,
there is lust. Then, Prabhupada also says, that in our case, also, the, those
cases, maybe, say, are extreme. That is true. They are extreme. But in our case,
also. You know, often, when the enjoying mentality becomes too strong. And at
at that time, we also want to maintain, you know, the facade in the devotee
community that I am a good devotee. But we want to enjoy. Then, what do we do?
We try to find out a way privately, when nobody is seeing. At that time, we
indulge in sense gratification. So, what are we doing? We are taking all
possible precautions so that nobody finds out. But then, we want to do it. So,
rather than worrying whether, whether a, people find, a, out. We should worry by
lust is finding me out. You know, while I am, I am letting lust find me out
rather, we, we, you know, stay str..., strong in Krishna Consciousness. Then,
lust will not be able to find us out. And attack us. And torment us. So, people
can enjoy intelligently. Prabhupada writes in a letter that the intelligence is
meant to cu..., you know, give up the enjoying mentality. But our problem is
that, we are habituated to enjoying intelligently. That means we use our
intelligence to enjoy rather than to curb the enjoyment. Now, enjoyment, in and
of itself is not wrong. The soul is meant to enjoy. But there is enlightened
enjoyment. Then, there is ignorant enjoyment. So, enjoyment at the spiritual
level is enlightened, at the bodily level, is ignorant. So, at the very least,
we should be in the transition. You know, there is, a, regulated bodily
enjoyment that is allo..., allo..., allowed. But the focus should be on trying
to get more and more spiritual enjoyment. So, lust covers the in..., lust
occupies the intelligence, also. And that is why in the sadhaka stage, at least
initially, in our spiritual life, we cannot put too much trust in our
intelligence. If we put too much trust in our intelligence, then the
intelligence may mislead us. Sometimes, we go into temptation. And at that time,
we say, you know, nothing is going to happen. You know I am ok. I am just doing
this for the sake of service. I have no ulterior motives. I am doing this for,
you know, so, a, for the sake of service. So, now, that may be the motivation,
initially. But whether it will stay the motivation, eventually, one cannot say.
You know, and, you know, at a contact with the sense objects, corrodes our
intelligence. And as the intelligence becomes corroded, corroded, corroded, then
gradually, the contamination becomes so much more that, you know, we start
thinking of something else only.

So, in general, the exposure to sense objects has to be minimised as much as
possible. And certainly, we should, a, i..., if, appe..., appea..., others are
warning us, then we have to be careful. That we should not assume that, yes,
nothing is going to happen. If we trust our intelligence too much in the sadhaka
stage, you know, then we will get ourselves into trouble. Because right now, our
intelligence is not trustworthy. Intelligence is sabotaged by lust. It is
hijacked by lust right now. So, th..., what does this mean? Do not trust the
intelligence too much? The, now, of course, at a function level, at a daily
level, we have to use our intelligence. Ok. Should I do this? Or should I do
that? Should I go here or go there? And at a normal level, should I kep..., go,
catch this bus or wait for the next bus? Should I, you know, use this? You know,
so, should I, say, use this computer or that computer? Whatever. We have to make
so many decisions. And we will have to use our intelligence over there. That is
fine. You know. We will use our intelligence because that intelligence is given
for that purpose. But especially, when we are doing activities which the
scriptures have told are dangerous. They involve, for example, prolonged, or
prolonged contact with the sense objects. When it is there. Sometimes, that
person may say that, a preacher may say that, I am associating, I am actually,
you know, giving counselling to a woman. And that per..., for that purpose, the
pur..., preacher may start associating with, too much with that woman. Now,
initially, the motive may be benevolent. But that can change very easily. So,
one has to, so, especially when one is doing something which is, you know, which
scriptures warn us to be careful about. At that time, if w..., w..., we think,
oh, nothing is going to happen. So, when we talk about not trusting the
intelligence too much, that especially means that when our intelligence prompts
us to do things, you know, that are contrary to scripture. But are not
necessarily, you know, directly wrong at that time. So, the classic example of
how intelligence gets a, you know, perverted, not exactly by lust. But by, by
something separate from the, you know, Absolute Truth, f..., from devotional
service is Bharat Maharaja. You know, when Bharat Maharaja, when he saw the baby 
deer, you know, flowing away helplessly in the streams of the river. At that
time, it was a benevolent, you know, thing to do to do, a, jump into the river.
And take care of that. Save that baby deer. That is very, that is good. Now,
thing is that when there is a danger, when there is emergency, w..., we should
help. But after that, Bharat Maharaja's, you know, we could say, error was that
he thought that now, that I have rescued it, I have to maintain it. I have to
maintain it. So, this deer has no one. Who will take care of it? I have to take
care of it. So, now, yes, when emergency, we can give up our dharma. Not give up
entirely. But we may have to do the needful to take care of situations. But
then, if we have a prescribed duty. You know. So, for Bharat Maharaja was
renounce the world and has to, to focus entirely on God. To take up the
responsibility to taking care of a deer. You know, that is a, that is a
misunderstanding of one's duty. And then, after that, when the deer started
distracting him, do..., while doing his bhajan, he said, oh, the bhajan can be
done later, also. So, deer is important. I have to, I have to make sure that the
deer is protected that deer does not, should not feel displeased. Deer should be
given proper attention. And then, slowly, but surely, eventually, he got so
distracted from his bhajan that he f..., chanting, started chasing after the
deer. And at the moment of death, he was thinking of the deer. So, then he
became the, got the body of a deer. So, here, you know, Bharat Maharaja was not
attracted to anything sinful. But the point is the intelligence led him in a
wrong direction.

So, we can say we have material intelligence and spiritual intelligence. So,
material intelligence is the intelligence which directs us towards materialistic
things. Spiritual intelligence is, you know, the intelligence which directs us
towards Krishna. So, spiritual intelligence primarily comes from guru, sadhu,
shastra. So, material intelligence is the intelligence which is used in material
things. And it is, it is not necessarily always bad. But it has to be
subordinate to spiritual intelligence. So, here, when Krishna is saying that
intelligence is also covered by lust. That means that it is the material
intelligence that is covered by lust. It is the material side of one's, you
know, you know, rationale faculty, contemplation faculty that can get g..., 
taken over by lust. So, now, Prabhupada gives a very intriguing purport. He
talks about it in terms of a battle itself. He says, just like when a battle is
going on, the enemy starts, the enemy Prabhupada gives a very intriguing
purport. He talks about it in terms of a battle itself. He says, just like when
a battle is going on, the enemy starts, what does the enemy? The enemy wants to
attack. Say, there are two armies. And the two are facing off. So, there are two
sides of a river. And both of them are facing off. And there is one bridge. So,
now, what will be critical is both sides will want to conquer the bridge. So, if
they had the bridge, they can cross over and come to the other side. So, the,
conquering the, the bridge is like a strategic point. By which they can con...,
come from this side to other side. So, stragegic means those which are of s...,
very significant importance. So, Prabhupada says that, the enemy, which is lust
over here, has taken up, has captu..., Prabhupada's first sentence is:

"The enemy has captured different strategic positions in the body of the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa is giving hints of those places"

So, different strategic positions. What are the strategic positions? The senses,
the mind, and intelligence. Now, when, when creator..., Krishna is giving hints.
You know, Krishna is giving direct statements. Ok. There is mind, se...,
intelligence and, you know, s..., senses. So, why is Prabhupada using the word
hints? You know, because, actually speaking, these locations are not literally
physical. See, there is a difference between physical and material. We may use
the word s..., interchangeably. But physical largely refers to gross material.
And material itself can be, do subtle, also. So, the body that is visible to us
is a physical body. The mind is not exactly considered physical. Of course, now,
terms can have different meanings at different times. So, we may even consider
in some terminology, some context, the mind may also be considered physical.
When the word physical is used as an equivalent of material. But in general,
physical and mental are the two aspects of material. So, when we say lust is
situated in the eyes. So, the eyes are lusty. Eyes always want to look at sense
objects. Now, what does it mean? It is not that if I take a, you know, a scan of
the eye. And find out. Ok. At the northether..., eastern side of the eye, at a
particular location, the lust has captured. You know, kust is not at a physical
location. So, when we talk about lust being, lust is itself subtle. We are
talking about senses, the senses, also, if you remember, we have discussed
earlier there is the spiritual eye. There is the subtle eye. And there is the,
there is the faculty of sight. And there is the organ of sight. So, when Krishna
is saying the senses are situated in the se..., you know, you know, senses are
the, situa..., l..., are the seating places, sitting places of the lust. That
means it is not the gross eye. It is the s..., faculty of sight which gets
attracted to sense objects again and again. So, that is why these are hints. You
know, we cannot have a, we cannot have a gross physical gun and shoot it. We
have to, eye..., it is all through inference. Ok. The eye. When the eyes are,
you know, just constantly going towards sense objects. Then, we understand, oh,
my eyes are becoming lusty. My eyes are going wrong directions. Like that. So,
you know, Pra..., He is giving hints. And then, m..., my, how does lust attack
now? We will discuss that, you know, you know, with respect to the next slide.
But basically, the mind, senses, and intelligence, they are there. Now, in this
purport, Srila Prabhupada explains how lust may, you know, sabotage a person's
conceptions. And he quotes a verse which seems to have nothing to do with lust.
So, it is the well-known verse from 10.84.13 in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is
when Vasudeva performed sacrifices at Kurukshetra. He is given instructions. So:

        yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke
        sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ
        yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij
        janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

So, "yasyātma-buddhiḥ". So, one who thinks that I am the body. "ātma-buddhiḥ".
One, that is oneself. One's "buddh...". By one's "buddhiḥ", one thinks, what
does he think? "kuṇape tri-dhātuke". That this body which is made up of three
elements. That is kapha, vata, pitta. That one thinks that I am that body. Then,
"sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu". So, one who thinks that the byproducts of the body.
"sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu". That means, you know, the relatives and others. And, so,
they are "sva-dhīḥ". They are my people. They are my people. Why? Because they
are connected with my body. And "bhauma ijya-dhīḥ". So, "bha...", a, "bhauma" is
the earth. "ijya-dhīḥ". "ijya" is worshipable. "dhīḥ" is the intelligence which
thinks one's motherland to be worshipable. "bhauma ijya-dhīḥ". Now, some o...,
some, in some cases, you know, the acharyas have also mentioned that this also
refers to just think of just a, stone statues to be worshipable. That means to
consider a, not understanding the transcendental aspect of the deity to take any
stone statue. And think it to be worshipable. "bhauma ijya-dhīḥ".
"yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij". S..., "yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ" is that when
one goes to, you know, holy places, the, one's idea is "salile". "salile" is to
take a bath. "na karhicij". But what, what, what one does not do is "janeṣv
abhijñeṣu". One does not associates it with those "jñeṣu", those people, who are
"abhijña". Those who know, ha..., those who have spiritual knowledge. "jña" is
to know. So, "abhijñ" is to know properly. Those who have proper spiritual
knowledge. Such people. "yasyā". That was the start of the verse. Such people
are what? "sa eva go-kharaḥ". Such people are like cows or asses. So, now, what
is the point of saying they are like cows or asses? You know, co..., a...,
asses are, as we know, considered intell..., unintelligent. "mudha". Often, a
person who is unintelligent is compared to an ass. So, they are unintelligent.
Now, we may wonder why is it compared to a cow, also? You know, cow is a ho...,
cow is considered holy. You know, c..., we, co..., say mother cow. And Krishna
loves cows. And then, we protect cows. That is true. But at the same time, the
soul in a cow's body is in a subhuman body. And the cows, they ma..., they are
gentle. They are loving. But at the same time, they are capable of being put
under illusion. How is that? When a calf is brought in the front of the cow. The
cow m..., m..., herself may not give milk very easily. But when the calf is
brought near the cow. And the cow, you know, calf is, touches the udder, then
cow starts giving milk. And after that, even the calf is taken away. And the
look a..., and still, the cow, the milk can be taken out from the other side.
And sometimes, even look alike of the calf is brought. Just by seeing that calf,
the other starts m..., m..., feeling that look alike of the calf. And the milk
may start flowing from the other. Often, that is how out, howmilk is taken out
from the cow. So, the, the point here is, there are different, you know, ways of
looking at things. So, when we are looking at the Krishna connection of the
cows. Yes, they are, they are g..., they are holy. They are me..., they are
loved by Krishna. So, they should be cherished by us. But from another
perspective, it is an animal body. And it is an animal body, so there are, there
is the capacity of the soul going under illusion. And at the soul, not just
capacity, there is, that, that, that is the natural way it is. And because it is
that way. So, therefore, "go-kharaḥ". So, "sa eva go-kharaḥ". So, the point is
such a person is in animal consciousness. Now, what is the connection of this
verse with the discussion about lust? You know. He says, it is not saying over
here that the person goes and starts indulging in lusty activities. You know.
Going into affairs with people. Then, why is it s...? What is this got to do
with lust? Actually, this is what happens, this kind of conceptions come up when
the "buddhiḥ" is contaminated. So, that is, the, if you see the word "buddhiḥ"
comes twice in this verse. And "buddhiḥ" is there even in the, you know, v...,
the verse and discussion from the Gita. "buddhiḥ" is one of the places where
intelligence, where, you know, lust is situated. And when lust is situated in
the "buddhiḥ", what happens? One starts thinking like this. And I am th..., that
I am the body. Those connected with the body or mind. So, now, we may think of
lust as making people do immoral activities. You know, people do brutal
activities. That is, so, lust. No doubt. That is the effect of lust. No doubt.
It ha..., it makes us do wrong things. Which are, even from the today's, you
know, you know, legal system point of view wrong. So, people forcibly violate
others and things like that. But from the Bhagavatam's perspective, from the
Vedic perspective, even if a person is engaging in, now, all these activities
are, dh..., dh..., they are dharmic activities. They are good activities. In
the, from the point of view of material goodness. To be patriotic is considered
good. To be, going to a ho..., holy place is considered to be good. To be, to
be taking care of one's family is thus considered to be good. So, all this is
good. But if that is all that person gets consumed by, then the person does not
understand there is mu..., there is something higher to life. Then, that
person's consciousness is considered to be equivalent to a "go-kharaḥ". That of
a cow or an ass. So, here, Prabhupada is quoting this verse is an example of how
the "buddhiḥ" gets contaminated. Now, let us move forward.

        tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau
        niyamya bharatarṣabha
        pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ
        jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam

"tasmāt". "tasmāt" means therefore. So, therefore, what? Previous verse, it was
said where it is, lust situated. And lu..., how lust acts. So, lust acts by
covering our intelligence. And where is it situated? Mind, senses, intelligence.
Therefore, now that you know, where the m..., enemy, enemy is. What the strategy
of the enemy is. Therefore, now, conquer it. How will we conquer it? First,
"tvam indriyāṇy ādau". Begin with the intelligence. "niyamya bharatarṣabha".
"niyamya bharatarṣabha" means, you know, regulate. Oh, Arjuna, oh
"bharatarṣabha". Best among the Bharatas. "rṣabha". The word "ṛṣabha" refers to
bull. So, in the Vedic cultural context, the lion or tiger is considered to be
the strongest of the out, of the wild animals. And the bull is considered to be
the, among the strongest in the domestic or indoor animals. If a bull becomes
wild, that bull can just, you know, run mean to people and knock them over. And
the, you know, bull can cause us tamped. In which people can get brutally
wounded. So, especially if a bull goes mad, then it can be quite devastating.
And that is why mata..., matadors who try to fight with bulls, they use the,
they have their swords. And they have their red clothes, and they ch..., char..., 
bulls come charging at them. Or there are rodeos where people sit on bulls. And
then, the bull charges out. And how long can they sit on the bull holding unto
it? Although the bull tries this way, and this way, and that way to try to throw
them off. So, all these sports are considered exciting because bulls are
hostile. You know, if bulls were like pussycats. You know, nobody would go on to
see how long you can sit on a, somebody can sit on a pussycat. You know, it is a
gentle sweet cat. Or who fight with a pussycat. No, bulls are not like, bulls
are, bulls are, can be, can be fierce. So, "puruṣarṣabha" is a word used to
describe how a person is, so, m..., is so fierce, so powerful. So, j..., now,
this is a, this is a positive glorification for a ksatriya. That you are
"puruṣarṣabha". This has come before, also. "puruṣarṣabha". "bharatarṣabha".
"puruṣarṣabha". So, "puruṣarṣabha" had come in 2.15.

        yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete
        puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha
        sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ
        so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate

So, one who is not disturbed in happiness and distress, that person will attain
liberation. Oh, "puruṣarṣabha". Oh, best, oh, bull among human being. That
means best among human beings. So, here, "bharatarṣabha". H..., that is, oh,
oh, bull among the descendants of Bharata. In the Bharata cla..., dynasty.
"bharatarṣabha". So, the context is, yes, Arjuna, you are powerful. But your
true power may be seen not just in how you conquer, a, Karṇa or Duryodhana. But
your true power will also be seen in how you conquer lust. That requires
heroism. See, in today's society, often, heroism is defined as gratifying lust.
That means in movies, who is shown as a hero? You know, a person, there is a
person. And there is a heroine. And then, the hero has to fight against various
odds. And then, beats up the villains and then rescues the heroine from some
dangers. And then, finally, they get their hand together. They, they they join
hands. You know. They are, come united. And so, a person who does is is
considered to be heroic. Now, is that, now, i..., if somebody is in danger and
the protection is offered at that time. You know, i..., that is a heroic
activity. But that is not the only definition of heroism. That is a definition
of z..., hero..., heroism from the material perspective. So, yes, you know,
even, you know, that is accepted for ksatriyas when they are rulers that they
have to be heroic and protect us. But, so just as heroism is required to protect
someone. But actually, you know, far greater heroism is required to protect
ourselves from lust. And to set an example by which we protect others from lust.
So, heroism is p..., you know, that, to be able to rep..., to be able to reject
lust. To fight back lust and to drive it out from our consciousness. So,
Arju..., Krishna is telling Arjuna, be this kind of "puruṣarṣabha". So, we know
Arjuna. He, at one level, we could say that, you know, he had many wives.
He, Draupadi was there. And Subhadrā was there. So, he had several wives.
But still, we see that, also when he went to Ruishi, he refused. Because he was,
by, for ksatriyas to have many wives is not considered wrong. Polygamy was
allowed in the Vedic culture. Because often, the number of women would be more
than the number of men. And also, you know, the, so, when, one women needed to
be protected. So, they would have a ma..., man, especially a, a strong ksatriya
who is capable of keeping many women satisfied. You know, and protected, and
provided for. That person can have many wives. Polygame was al..., but we see
there, Arjuna was controlled, sense controlled, also, when he went Svarga to
Urvashi. And Urvashi offered herself. But he said, no, this is not according to
dharma. So, "puruṣarṣabha". So, heroism is also sense control. Now just fighting
to get the desires of the mind and senses fulfilled. In many cases, that, you
know, in some cases, you know, get, fighting to get the desires of the mind and
senses fulfilled can be within the precincts of dharma. And that may be, from
the material point of view, heroic. But in many cases, those same desires can
drag a person to terrible things which make the person into a villain. So, from
a, if we see, many of the movies that are there. You know, there is a hero.
There is a heroine. And there is a villain. Now, if we look at it. You know,
mov..., these movies' storyline is very similar to the stories of the Rama...,
Maha..., Ramayana. There is a hero. There is a heroine. And there is villain.
There is Rama, Sita. And there is Ravana. So, and then, the heorine, villain has
an evil eye on the heroine. And the hero and villain fight. And then, the hero
wins. That is how mo..., many movies are. So, if that is how many movies are.
So, is the Ramayana in the, you know, say, the typical mo..., romance movie?
Similar? Actually, from the spiritual perspective, the, in the movies, the hero
and the villain are both villains. Why is that? That is because both have a
self-centered enjoying mentality. Of course, the hero may be having consensual
relationship with the ba..., heroine. And the villain may be having a forcible
with the h..., you know, heroine. So, and that is a significant difference.
That is not a difference to be glossed over. But at the same time, everybody in
that situation is under illusion. Everybody in the bodily conception, and
everybody is thinking that, you know, gratifying oneself at the bodily level, is
going to satisfy us. So, in that sense, everybody is under illusion. So, you
know, it is just a matter of relative degree. You know, so, so..., some
illusion. So, the he..., the hero's illusion of bodily attraction is not making
that hero do something which is morally wrong. Whereas the villain's, you know,
attraction is making that villain do morally wrong things. Of course, the hero,
he will, may also do moral wrong things. But they are not considered wrong in
today's society. Because they are consensual. But that is not a, you know, you
know, consensus is not the basis of moral truth. You know, if consensus were,
consensus means, yes, people agree to it. If consensus were the besis, basis of
moral truth. Then, what Hitler did killing m..., m..., millions, killing lakhs
of jews. It was right because majority. Majority, people felt that, yes, the
jews are obstacles and they should be killed. So, consensus cannot be, you
know, dis..., can, you decide, you is to decide what is right and what is wrong.
You have to know from scripture. So, actually speaking, if we see in the
Ramayana. When Ravana sees Sita for the first time. Ravana is at the time in the
garb of a, you know, garb of a s..., a, a mendicant. And then, when he sees
Sita, he thinks that, you know, a woman, if they are praised, you know, for, for
their beauty. Then, they feel very pleased by that. He says, that will soften
her heart towards me. And he was thinking initially that, you know, actually if
I praise her. And then she becomes positively disposed towards me. And then, I
tell, who I am. Then, she will happily come with me. You know, I am so wealthy.
I am so powerful. I am the king of the rakshashas. You know, why will she not
come? So, he initially stated praising her. And when he was praising her, what
did Ravana say at that time? He said, I think that the c..., after making you,
the creator must have retired. Because the creator must have realised that there
can be no better perfec..., there no greater perfection than you. No greater
beauty that can be created than yours. Now, many romance movies have songs like
this. Same thing, you know. How much can I praise the creator who has made your
beautiful face? So, there are songs like that. So, what is the difference? You
know, in, in the romance movie, the hero is speaking this to a heroine. And
here, in the Ramayana, the villain is speaking it to the heroine. So, what is
the difference? Actually, there is a big difference from the material moral
perspective. But from the transcendental perspective, both are under illusion.
So, this is not, you know, this is not meant to deny the fact that there can be
material beauty at a, a, at the material level. And there, the material
morality is also important. But when we are talking from a philosophical
perspective, from the perspective of the soul, then even this is an illusion.
Even the interaction at the physical level is illusion. So, "bharatarṣabha".
So, all this we are discussing is that a true hero is one who can conquer the
senses. Who can conquer lust. So, "bharatarṣabha".

        tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau
        niyamya bharatarṣabha

And He says:

        pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ

"pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ" means this is very sinful. "prajahi". Conquer, word.

        jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam

It is very significant. What is Krishna using the word? It is the destroyer of
"jñāna". That is knowledge. And "vijñāna" can be a realisation. So, Prabhupada
uses the word very, realisation, in the tran..., translation.

"slay this destroyer of knowledge and self-realization."

And Prabhupada also says that, further, actually, it also refers to the urge for
self-realisation. So, jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam". When, you know, lust comes over
us, it makes us forget that I am not the body. I am the soul. So, the "jñāna" is
"nāśanam". But along with that, "vijñāna". "vijñāna" is realised knowledge. Or
the pro..., knowledge, or the urge by which we will get the realised knowledge.
So, the urge for self-realisation is also destroyed. Because, you know, if, when
lust starts attacking us. You know. We do not feel like chanting. We do not feel
like calling out to Krishna. We do not feel like doing anything which will
decrease that lust. Because, you like. This is enjoyable. Let me do it more and
more. So, it destroys our spiritual knowledge. And it destroys our inclination
for acquiring spiritual knowledge, also. So, that is why, you know, when people
have too much sensual enjoyment easily available. Then, they do not feel the
impetus for practicing spiritual life only. So, having the certain level of
austerity, in our life, you know, having the, accepting some sort of difficulty
at the material level in our life helps us to have a fighting a spirit. Helps us
to re..., c..., remember, remember. Ok, this is not a comfortable place. I have
to get out of here. So, having too much pleasure at the material level, too much
comfort at the material level creates a complacency by which we become willing
captives in the hands of lust. We are captives. But we become willing captives.
Willing captives means one who does not resist. You know. Yes. If there is a
prison. Yes. I am happy in the prison. No need to find out a way out. I am happy
here. So, we become willing captives when we provide ourselves too much
enjoyment. You know, when there i..., there is too much comfort available. Why?
Because actually, the enjoyment that is available, it is not going to last for
very long. Maybe a few years and after that, it is going to, body is going to
grow old, get diseased and die. And it, it may last, will last for a few years,
also. Let me just get disrupted because of some disease. Some economical
heava..., upheaval. Some relationship p..., rapture. Who knows? So, in the
Mahabharata, when Arjuna, you know, when the Pandavas and Yadavas, Arjuna went
to heaven. And after that, the remaining Pandavas went to Badrikashrama. To that
area to do austerity. And then, they were, they went up to Kuvera's abode. Not
exactly Kuvera's abode, but one of the Kuvera's gardens. One of his, we could
say, resorts. And they were living there. So, a, while they were living there,
it was K..., it was v..., natural scenic and there, you know, Kuvera's
attendants were providing for their needs. They were not living in the palace.
They were living in the forest only. But it was very comfortable li..., staying
in the forest. So, after staying there for some time, Bhīma came and said to
Yudhiṣṭhira. Yudhiṣṭhira, you know, we should, I do not think why we should stay
here. We should leave from here. He said, why? He said, if we stay here, the
comfort that is there, is, this place will make us lose impetus for the great
mission that we have headed. You know. We will, we have to, at the end, end of
the, when, for exile, we will have to fight a war. And if we are living very
comfortably over here, we will lose the impetus to fight the war. Therefore, we
should leave. And Yudhiṣṭhira point as and he says, yes, what, Bhīma, what you
are saying is right. We should leave from here. And they depart. So, this does
not mean that we have to make our lives aw..., misera..., intentionally
miserable. But having too much comfort can create co..., complacency which
blinds us. And makes us willing captives. So, Krishna is telling over here that
"vijñāna". "vijñāna-nāśanam". "vijñāna" is the urge for self-realisation. So,
when we have too much facility for lusty enjoyment, then "vijñāna-nāśanam". The
urge for spiritual realisation also goes away. Now, Prabhupada explains what is
this "jñāna" and "vijñāna"? He quotes the catur-sloki Bhagavatam. And he quotes
a verse from there. Where the words "jñāna" and "vijñāna" come. So:

        jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me
        yad vijñāna-samanvitam
        sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca
        gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā

So, this is 2.9.31 in the Bhagavatam. So, the, Lor..., Supreme Lord is speaking
this to Brahmaji. There is a catur-sloki Bhagavatam. Which, you know, the whole
Bhagavatam's message comes in four sa..., s..., synth verses. So, the knowledge
of the self and Supreme Self is very con..., "jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me". It is
"parama-guhyaṁ". This "jñānaṁ". And Kri..., so, Lord, the Lord is telling
Brahmaji that the knowledge that I have given. It is "parama-guhyaṁ". It is very
confidential. "yad vijñāna-samanvitam". And I have given it to you with, with
realisation. "sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca". And m..., that knowledge with its
categories, "gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā". It i..., it can be understood when if you
contemplate on it, when I have imparted to you, and you contemplate on it. You,
you have to understand it. So, just as the Lord gives the knowledge to Brahmaji
over there, the Lord is also giving the knowledge to Arjuna over here. And, now,
Prabhupada explains, so, first, Prabhupada's purport talks about "jñāna" and
"vijñāna". And then, he talks about "ādau". Prabhupada says, "ādau", what does
it mean? You know, fir..., first, he says, is, it is best that we start in the
beginning only.

"if one is educated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness from the very beginning, that natural
love of God cannot deteriorate into lust. When love of God deteriorates into
lust, it is very difﬁcult to return to the normal condition."

But it is so powerful that even a late beginner can become a lover of God. You
know, Prabhu..., so that is. So, it is best. So, for example, if children are
brought up right from the childhood without having too much exposure to sensual
stimuli, they are provided the, a protected culture. Then, there are no bad
impressions which will keep dragging them away. But if somebody has got a lot of
bad impressions. And they come to Krishna Consciousness. Then, the bad impressions
act like ghosts. Which keep haunting. Keep haunting. But Kishna Consciousness is
so powerful, Prabhupada says, even a late beginner can become a lover of God.
So, no matter when we have be..., can. No matter what our past conditionings
are. We should start. So, Prabhupada gives two meanings of "ādau", therefore, he
says. So, what are the meanings of "ādau"? He says:

"from any stage of life, or from the time of understanding its urgency, one can
begin regulating the senses in Kṛṣṇa consciousness"

So, from any stage of life. That means, ideally, would be the earliest childhood
stage. As Prahlad Maharaja says:

        kaumāra ācaret prājño

Right from childhood. One should start practicing. You know, in fact, it is even
before. In the, in the Garbhādhāna saṃskāra attracts an ausp..., a..., attracts
a good soul into the body of the, female through the male. So, but from any
stage of life. Now, it is talking about we ourselves practicing. So, from any
stage of life. Or from the stage of understanding its urgency. Ok. It is so
important. I must wait. "tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau". So, now, what does it mean
"indriyāṇy ādau"? With the, in the beginning, of the senses, so, let us look at
that. Yeah. So, here, this hierarchy which Krishna talks about in the next
verse. Krishna is talking about this four-level hierarchy. There is sense
objects. There is senses, mind, intelligence, soul and ultimately the Supersoul.
So, with this hierarchy in mind, let us look back at the, you know, verse. And
then, I will come back to this hierarchy.

        indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur
        indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ
        manasas tu parā buddhir
        yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ

So, "indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur". So, superior to senses i..., you know, the senses
are superior to "āhur". "āhur" here refers to the body. So, the b..., b..., body
is made of material elements. So, the senses are superior to the material
elements. Then, "indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ". Superior to the senses is the mind.
"manasas tu parā buddhir". Superior to sen..., s..., se..., mind is the
intelligence. And "yo". "yo" refers to that soul. "buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ". "yo
buddheḥ". That "saḥ". "saḥ". That soul is superior to the intelligence, also.
S..., "saḥ" refers to the soul, here. So, let us look at this once again,
pictorially. So, you will see here that, you know, now, this does not, so, what
is told in this verse is just the center of circle. That means soul,
intelligence, mind, senses. Now, for the sake of continuity, you know, and
completeness, we can also add further elements which Srila Prabhupada mentions
in the purport. So, above the soul is the Supersoul. And below the senses are
the sense objects. So, this way, there are six elements in the hierarchy, in the
connection. So, the Supersoul, now, if you see what is there in the big circle.
The ob..., you know, the elongated circle, it is, you know, the four elements.
So, these four elements together comprise the conditioned soul. So, soul alone
would be just the top element. But soul along with intelligence, mind, and
senses, that is the conditioned soul. So, Prabhupada often uses the word living
entity to refer to the conditioned soul. And the soul itself to refer to the
soul proper. Just the soul. But living entity refers to the soul in embodied
existence. So, then, this particular oblong circle, flattened circle would be
like a, would be the con..., living entity or the conditioned soul. Now, the
living entity or the conditioned soul, what is it doing? It is in material
existence. And it is surrounded by subtle body and the gross body. So, the
senses are superior to the sense objects. Why is that? So, bo..., gross matter
means the sense objects are made of gross matter. So, senses are superior to
sense objects means, in general, it is senses that go to the sense objects.
Usually, sense objects do not come to the sen..., sense, you know, it is not
that the, if, there is, you know, a delicious food in the fridge. You know, it
is not that the fridge will push the door open, the fri..., the foo...,
delicious food will of..., food should open the door. And walk out. And come to
us. And put itself in our mouth. So, the, it is inert matter. So, of course, we
may say senses are also matter. But senses are connected with the soul. And
because of the soul's presence, the senses have some default energy. Because of
which, they start getting attracted towards certain things. So, b..., b...,
because of this, senses are considered superior to the, you know, sense objects.
Now, above the sense is the mind. Why is that? Because the mind's energy is far
greater and far longer than that of the, you know, senses. Far greater means,
you know, senses may see a sense object, they may think, ok, I will enjoy. But the
mind just rushes far, far ahead. And then, the mind keeps, you know, thinking of
the sense obj..., sense objects and dreaming about sense gratification far longer
than the mind, you know, the, than the senses. For example, when we are sick.
The senses cannot enjoy anything. But still, the mind is dreaming about sense
enjoyment. The mind may still have desires. You know. You know. And not only
that, apart from that, even when a person is in dreams. So, at that time, the
senses are not acting. But still, at that time, the mind is still acting. The
mind is dreaming. Fantasising. So, in that sense, the mind is superior to
senses. Of course, the mind is also the center point where all the sensory input
comes. Just like, we discussed, the palms. The palm is the center of all the
fingers. So, "indriyāṇi". You know. The Bhag..., the Bhagavad Gita, at Fifteenth
Chapter, Ninth Verse, says that:

        śrotraṁ cakṣuḥ sparśanaṁ ca
        rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva ca
        adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ
        viṣayān upasevate

So, all the five senses are centered around the mind. So, in that sense, the
mind is superior to the senses. And, you know, going back to the chariot body
analogy, the horses are like the senses. The reins, reins can control all the
horses. So, in that sense, reins are superior to the h..., you know, horses. So,
then, after that, above the mind is the intelligence. Why is the mind,
intelligence considered to be above? Because the intelligence has the capacity
to control the mind. You know, there are times when all of us feel like doing
certain things. But we do not do those things. Because our intelligence tells us
not to do it. For example, if we are in an office. And the boss shouts at us.
You know, we may feel like shouting back at the boss. But we will not do that.
43:20
