Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vEGhEI9A3C4
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_071_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_04_Text_14_to_23_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=nVkOx15A-6Or8vW72O4qE8blQ2V8MTU0ODQ4NzkwN0AxNTQ4NDAxNTA3&v=vEGhEI9A3C4

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Today,
we will continue with our discussion of the Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita.
We have discussed, till now, the first section. And we are in the second
section of how Krishna is the, you know, source and the goal of all paths. He
gives different paths which are ultimately meant to come back to Him. So, we
discussed yesterday about demigod worship. Let us move forward and discuss the
next verse today. So:

        na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti
        na me karma-phale spṛhā
        iti māṁ yo ’bhijānāti
        karmabhir na sa badhyate

So, Krishna is telling over here. "na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti". "limpanti" means to
be, you know, affected by. Krishna is saying, I am not affected by work. And "na
me karma-phale spṛhā". Nor do I desire the fruits of work. "iti māṁ yo
’bhijānāti". One who understand this about Me, one who understands Me thus.
"karmabhir na sa badhyate". Such a person will not be bound by karma. So, what
is Krishna telling actually over here? "na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti". That He says,
I am not attached to, you know, the, so, actually, when we do work, there are
two things. One is we do the work to get some result. And that work is done
outwards to get some result. And inward, it has an effect. When we do a work, we
feel excited about it. We feel burdened by it. We feel annoyed by it. We feel
fearful about. We can have different emotions. So, we seek something outside.
And it has some effect inside whatever work we do. So, Krishna is saying,
that neither of these happens to Him. "na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti". That the work
does not affect Me inwardly. You know, "na me karma-phale spṛhā". It does not, I
do not desire any result. Why does Krishna not desire any result? Because
Krishna is complete. He is complete. He does not have anything to gain
specifically. Now, theme is, Krishna's elaboration of what He were told in the
previous verse. That is 4.13. 

        tasya kartāram api māṁ
        viddhy akartāram avyayam

So, 4.13D, what He says over there is, "viddhy akartāram avyayam". That
actually, I am the non-doer. So, how is He the non-doer? He is explaining over
here. So, He says that, I do not desire, I d..., I am not affected internally by
the work that I do. Nor do I seek the external result of the work. Now, what is
the point of stating this? The point is that Krishna is transcendental. That
Krishna is, although He appears in the material realm, like the le..., rest of
the living beings, He is not in the material realm. He is transcendental.
Beyond. His motivations are transcendental. His aspirations are transcendental.
And therefore, one who understand it, "iti māṁ yo ’bhijānāti". One who
understand this, such a person, "karmabhir na sa badhyate". Such a person will
not be bound by "karma". Not be bound by "karma". So, what is the implication of
this? That, once we understand Krishna's transcendental position, then we also
become transcendental by gaining this understanding. See, transcendental
understanding is not theoretical. It is an understanding based on
transformation. It is a, you know, understanding when we understand, then
wha..., why does Krishna act? If He is not materially motivated, why does He
act? He acts out of love. Now, we may say, is that l..., is love also not a
"karma-phale spṛhā"? No. When we use the word "karma", it is used in a material
sense. When we want something material as a result, of something that we have
done. That is "karma-phale spṛhā". But Krishna does not want result of anything
material. So, "iti māṁ yo ’bhijānāti". One who understands this about Me.
"karmabhir na sa badhyate". So, knowledge about Krishna is extraordinary. As
devotees, we are not interested in, say, the Battle of Waterloo. Or the Battle
o..., of, there are so many historically important battles that happened.
Waterloo. The battle where, a, made, say, the battle where Napoleon was
defeated. And England won the war against France. Or there was a battle of
Normandy where, a, they, they, Krishna went. So many battles are there
throughout history. There, there was a Battle of Plassey. And so many other
battles. But the devotee is not interested in those battles.  Then, why are we
interested in the battle of Kurukshetra. Because it is connected with Krishna.
And why are we interested in Krishna? Because Krishna is not an ordinary person.
He is a transcendental person. And being a transcendental person means that He
is all-a..., He can make us transcendental. So, when we come to know Krishna, we
become purified. And when we become purified, then we return to Him. So, there
are, there is one important aspect to understand. There is to know Krishna, and
to know about Krishna. The two are different things. To know Krishna and to know
about Krishna. What is the difference? You know, when a doctor examines a
patient. Hmm. Say, the patient is a small child. And the patient has come with
a, a, a, the child is there, small, with his, her, with his mother, the child
has come. So, now, the doctor examines the patient. When the doctor examines the
patient, what does the doctor actually do? Doctor takes the blood pressure.
The heartbeat. The pulse rate. Th..., th..., the various bodily parameters. Now,
by that, the doctor will come to know about the patient. About the child. Will
the doctor know the child? To know the child, the doctor has to strike a
personal relationship. So, the mother may not know about the WBC count. The
platelet count. The urine composition. The, a, similar physical parameters.
Technical physical parameters of the child. So, she does not know about the
child. But she knows the child. Because she has a relationship of love with that
child. So, the point here is that there is, one can know about God. And one can
know God. So, a clinical approach towards God can give us a lot of knowledge
about God. Ok. God appeared over. God came over here. God did this. God did
that. God does like this. God acts like that. That is theoretical knowledge.
That is not transformational knowledge. We want not just theoretical knowledge,
but transformational knowledge. What is the difference between the theoretical
and transformational? A, actually, theoretical knowledge just stays in the head.
Transformational knowledge, you know, changes the direction of our love. When we
come to know Krishna, not just know about Krishna. When we come to know Krishna.
Then, we become purified. And when we become purified. Then, we, a, redirect our
love towards Krishna. And we return back to Krishna by that. So:

        iti māṁ yo ’bhijānāti
        karmabhir na sa badhyate

Such a person, Krishna says, is not bound by karma. "karmabhir na sa badhyate".
Who? "iti māṁ yo ’bhijānāti". One who understands Me that I am not materially
motivated in any way. So, Prabhupada now quotes here this verse from the "smṛti"
is that:

        nimitta-mātram evāsau
        sṛjyānāṁ sarga-karmaṇi
        pradhāna-kāraṇī-bhūtā
        yato vai sṛjya-śaktayaḥ

So, "pradhāna-kāraṇī". "kāraṇī-bhūtā". So, "kāraṇī" is, "kāraṇī" is cause.
"pradhāna" is main. Now, "sṛjya-śaktayaḥ". So, actually, the Supreme Lord is a
"pradhāna-kāraṇī". "nimitta-mātram evāsau". So, "sṛjyānāṁ sarga-karmaṇi". So,
"nimitta-mātram" is the instrumental cause. So, there is a primary cause. And
there is an instrumental cause. "pradhāna-kāraṇī" and "nimitta-mātram".
"nimitta-mātram" is a word that will come later in the Bhagavad Gita, in eleven
point, you know, thirty-three when Krishna will say:

        nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin

Just because an instrument for me. So, here, what is the context? What is
Prabhupada saying over here? That actually, when the things happen in the world.
Is the Lord responsible for the things happenings? For example, say, there is a
place where there is, there are three places. One place, where there is just the
appropriate quantity of rains. And there, crops go, you know, properly over
there. Another place, where there is too much rains. And there is flood over
there. Third place, where there is, a, very little, where there is practically
no rain. And droughts are there. So, now, actually speaking, is the Lord
responsible for why there are l..., more rains here? Less rains here? Then, no
rains there at all? A, no. Actually, it is, He is the ultimate cause. But what
happens over there is ultimately the result of ka..., is actually the result of
karma. So, He is not responsible for the specifics. The specifics are the
reactions for the specific actions that people have performed. Overall, what
essentially happens is that the Lord is the overseer of the whole system. He is
not the specific cause. Just as judge, ju..., judge is not the cause of
specifically some person getting punishment. And some person getting
compensation. It is ultimately the supreme who is the, a, it is the person who
is responsible for whatever that person gets. So, another example could be if
we have a place where we get proper rains. But at one place, crops, you know,
go. At another place, weeds go. Why is that? Because at that place, different
kind of seeds are sown. So, one place, you know, the seeds were sown and the
crops were tilled. And another place, nothing like that was done. So, there is,
there is a difference between the two. So, same way, actually, there is a
difference between what kind of karma we have done. With the same circumstances,
you know, sometimes, two, twins are born in the same family. And one twin grows
up to be a very cultured gentlemanly person. Other twin grows to be an
uncultured brutish sort of person. Why the difference? It is actually, the
parents offered a similar kind of love and care. But the, they had different
inclinations coming from their previous lives. So, the Lord is not responsible.
Prabhupada is saying that we held ourselves responsible for what we do. So, now,
Prabhupada quotes the "Vedānta-sūtra" over here.

        vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye na sāpekṣatvāt

"vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye ". So, "vaiṣamya" is partiality. "na sāpekṣatvāt".
"vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye sāp...", "sāp...", sorry, "sāpekṣatvāt", "pekṣa". The
Lord does not take any "pekṣa". The Lord is not partial to anyone. So, let us
understand this point better. When we say the Lord is not partial. What is He?
He is reciprocal. Reciprocal means as we approach, so He rewards. You know, if
the Lord were just a, a, just a principle. So, if the, f..., for a principle,
neutrality would be the ideal. Yeah. So, is Krishna partial or impartial? You
know, for a force, or a principle, neutrality is the ideal. For a person,
reciprocity is the ideal. What does this mean? You know, if we have the
principle of gravity. Like that, principle of gravity. Now, if I take a cell,
say, and I drop it. It falls. Then, if I take a cloth. It drops. Now, if there
is a child who is on, on ten-storey building. And th..., that chi..., if the, if
I, if a cloth is dropped from, that will fall. If a child jumps from there,
child, child will also fall. So, gravity is a force. And gravity is neutral,
entirely. You know. You know. An object which we want to throw away in this car.
Throwing it away, there is no loss in it. Tidy, just get good riddance of it.
But a child, if he falls, that is a great loss. It is a disaster, a calamity for
the parents. And, but then, the, it is neutral. So, because gravity is a force.
So, for a force, or principle, neutrality is the ideal. But if there is a
person. For a person, neutrality is not the ideal. Imagine we went to meet
someone. And that person had a stone-like face, no matter whatever happened. You
know, somebody goes and prays that person. Oh, you are so kind. You are so
gentleman. Absolutely stone-like demeanor. And somebody comes. And he chastises
that person. Scold that person. Berate that person. Stone-like demeanor. No
matter whatever you do, that person is stone-like. Now, at one level, we may
appreciate how strike the person is. But it will not be much u..., developing
a relationship with that person. How will we develop that rela..., how do
we develop any relationship with that person? You know, and I, I, I, what makes
a person loveable is reciprocity. So, Krishna reciprocates. So, those who
approach Him with love, He reciprocates with them. So, this is a continuation of
the point:

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

So, Krishna's reciprocity is not partiality. He, if those, if somebody becomes
devoted to Him, Krishna reciprocates. We will discuss about Krishna's
partiality, impartiality later in the Ninth Chapter when we come to that verse:

        samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

9.29:

        na me dveṣyo ’sti na priyaḥ
        ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā
        mayi te teṣu cāpy aham

But here, the point is, reciprocity is not partiality. Reciprocity is actually
the evidence of personality. A person has to be reciprocal. If a person is not
reciprocal, then the personality does not have any meaning. Much meaning,
actually. So, moving forward now, reciprocity, you know, Krishna says that I am
reciprocal. And He is not, so, depending on the kind of seeds that are sown.
Accordingly, grow, crops will grow. So, Krishna is not discriminating, oh, for
this person, I will give you grains. This person, I will give weeds. No.
Whatever you sow, you will get. So, Krishna is saying, I am not personally
involved. So, the, whatever things happen in this world, He is not personally
involved in the sense that He does not have favorites. He does not say, I will
make, d..., do good for this person. I will do bad for this person. He just does
whatever is required according to the laws of karma. So, Krishna is not under
the laws of karma. But He does not normally interfere with the laws of karma. He
is above the laws of karma. And He lets them function. And when, even when He
acts, He does not come under the laws of karma. He acts by His own
transcendental principles of love. So, one who understands this transcendental
position of Krishna is actually liberated. So, now, a, let us look at the next
verse. So, Prabhupada explains that. Now, Krishna says that, actually, it is not
just theo..., theoretical statement and saying many people have become liberated
like this:

        evaṁ jñātvā kṛtaṁ karma
        pūrvair api mumukṣubhiḥ
        kuru karmaiva tasmāt tvaṁ
        pūrvaiḥ pūrva-taraṁ kṛtam

So, "evaṁ jñātvā". Have, knowing this. "kṛtaṁ karma". One who works accordingly.
"evaṁ jñātvā kṛtaṁ karma". "pūrvair api mumukṣubhiḥ". In the past, also, those
who were seeking liberation. So, what happened to them? "kuru". You know. "kuru
karmaiva tasmāt tvaṁ". So:

        evaṁ jñātvā kṛtaṁ karma
        pūrvair api mumukṣubhiḥ

means that those who were "mumukṣubhiḥ". You know, those who were seeking
liberation. "mumukṣubhiḥ" is seekers of liberation. Or those who wanted
liberation. Those who attained liberation. So, those who wanted liberation, they
acted in this way. And they got liberation. They, with this knowledge, they
acted. "jñātvā kṛtaṁ karma". In the past. "pūrvair". And therefore, Krishna is
telling Arjuna. Therefore, Arjuna, you should also act like that. "kuru
karmaiva". "kuru" means to do. "karmaiva". Act similarly. "tasmāt tvaṁ".
Therefore, you. "pūrvaiḥ pūrva-taraṁ kṛtam". As the people in the past have
acted. So, the point which Krishna is making is, this is a time-tested process.
Like a doctor who said. Just see, the, all the patients who have been cured.
So, you take this treatment, you will also get cured. So, Krishna is telling,
this is a time-honored process. This is one of the wonderful things about
Krishna Consciousness. It is not some newfangled notion. It is a, it is not even,
actually, Krishna Consciousness is neither a modern nor ancient. It is eternal.
It is transcendental. And, so, of course, it is transcendental and eternal. At
the same time, it has been going on in history for also a long long time. And
in that sense, it is something which is wonderful. It is wonderful that Krishna
Consciousness has actually purified many many people in the past. And it has
liberated people. So, of course, Krishna is talking here about karma-yoga which
will culminate in bhakti-yoga. So, Prabhupada says that, h..., the important
point of this verse is that:

"Foolish persons or neophytes in Kṛṣṇa consciousness often want to retire from
activities without having knowledge of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Arjuna’s desire to
retire from activities on the battleﬁeld was not approved by the Lord. One need
only know how to act."

So, the point is, actually, one does not have to give up activities. One simply
needs to know how to act. If we know how to act, then we will not be bound. It
is staying the believers. Krishna is saying, Arjuna, you are concerned about
karmic bondage. Yes, I agree with your concern. It is an important concern. But
do not assume that just by renouncing action, you will be able to, you know,
break free from bondage. Or that, just by doing action, you will get bound. Now,
I can, I, there is a way to act, by which one can stay free from bondage. So, it
is not work that is binding. It is the motivation that makes work binding. So,
just like, a, the Bhagavatam gives the example, well-known example that if a
person takes too much milk. Then, the person gets a digestive disorder. But
then, that same milk, when it is transformed into curd. That when person takes
the curd, that curd c..., helps to cure the digestive disorder. Similarly, work
itself causes bondage. But that work with a slight transformation, just like
curd is ultimately milk, only, with a transformation. So, m..., that same milk
which caused the disease can, a, l..., f..., cure the disease when it is
transformed appropriately. Similarly, work that is done for fruitive motive,
intentions causes bondage. But work done with detachment, with a devotional
intention will bring about liberation. So, one simply needs to know how to act.
And that Krishna is going to tell. So, now, here, Krishna is telling that I
teach dh..., I teach dharma. Now, the next section will be, Krishna will explain
how karma-yoga will free one from bondage. Karma-yoga is the dharma which
Krishna has come to teach. Karma-yoga, as we said, culm..., culminates in
bhakti-yoga. We will discuss about the connection in karma-yoga and bhakti-yoga
later. But karma-yoga is what? Frees one from bondage. That is what Krishna is
telling over here. People have become freed. So, you know, now, Krishna will
tell how one can practice this karma-yoga. So, He will describe this in several
verses by talking about the, how the profound the knowledge of karma is. So, He
says, I will explain things to you.

        kiṁ karma kim akarmeti
        kavayo ’py atra mohitāḥ
        tat te karma pravakṣyāmi
        yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt

So, "kiṁ karma kim akarmeti". So, what is karma. And what is akarma. "kavayo".
"kavayo" means even the wise people. "atra mohitāḥ". In this subject, "mohitāḥ".
They are deluded. Even the wise people do not know what is karma. And what is
akarma.

        kiṁ karma kim akarmeti
        kavayo ’py atra mohitāḥ
        tat te karma pravakṣyāmi

"pravakṣyāmi" means to speak. So, that karma, I will speak to you. "yaj jñātvā".
And Krishna is telling, making a very profound promise over here, a l..., a big
promise. He says, if you understand this, "yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt". You
will become free from inauspiciousness. What is inauspiciousness? Immediately,
He is talking about the karmic bondage that will come from the battlefield. You
will not become karmically bound. And ultimately, He is talking about all karmic
bondage. All karmic bondage. Krishna says, Arjuna, you become free, you will
become free from this. "yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt" will be repeated, the same,
one line from this verse will be repeated by Krishna in the Ninth Chapter.

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ
        pravakṣyāmy anasūyave
        ...

        idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ
        pravakṣyāmy anasūyave
        jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ
        yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt

So, in 9.1, Krishna says, y..., you will become free from bondage. And there
that He gives more direct knowledge about His personality. About His divinity.
About His supremacy and sweetness. So, the same point. You will become free from
inauspiciousness. So, Krishna is telling, this is not an easy knowledge to
understand. Even the wise people get bewildered about it. But if the, if you
understand it, you will become free. In the Mahabharata, there is a very
elaborate discussion, after the Mahabharata war. You know, when, the Kauravas and
their, all, all the soldiers are killed. And even the Pandava side, soldiers
are killed. Because of Aśvatthāmā's cowardly night, night attack. So, after
that, Krishna, you know, Yudhiṣṭhira feels very guilty. Repentant. Remorseful.
And He tells, a last condemn, them, I, that for my sake, for the sake of, you
know, gaining a kingdom, I became the cause of, the death of thousands and
thousands, millions of people. I, I, and he says, I have done such bad karma
that I will not be able to free from it, even if I do many many fire sacrifice.
The best thing that I should do is condemn, a, renounce to the forest. And live
a life of atonement. So, then, he tells, he almost makes this. Then, he says,
Bhīma, you can become the king. He says, I am going to renounce the world. Bhīma
gets engraged. He says, you know, if this was your intention, then why did we
have to fight the war? You could have said this earlier. You know, in the m...,
battle, when we are waiting, in the for..., forest, when we are waiting, you
also were waiting for the eventual regaining of the kingdom. And it is, you
consented to the war. So, B..., Kri..., Yudhiṣṭhira says Bhīma. Bhīma, you are a
child. You do not understand the complexities of dharma. You know, I am going to
renounce the world. Then, one by one, all the Pandavas, Arjuna, Nakula,
Sahadeva, Draupadi, all of them tried to persuade him. And then, you know,
Krishna speaks. Then, there are various sages. There are various brahmanas. They
speak this. Renunciates say that, actually, if it is just going to the forest,
that is going to free from ondage. Then, all the animals should be liberated
souls. He says, not like that. So, they have very interesting arguments. And as
a, finally, Bhīma says, oh, Yudhiṣṭhira, I thought you were a real warrior. And
you are a ksatriya. You have won the battle against the Kauravas. But now, you
are facing a tougher battle. And you are losing that battle. That is the battle
against your uncontrolled mind. So, then, Yudhiṣṭhira stiffens. It is suggesting
that his mind is uncontrolled. And then, Yudhiṣṭhira, till then, Yudhiṣṭhira is
just, may be silently listening to everyone. But now, he starts countering. He
says, you know, oh, child, it is not my mind that is uncontrolled. The
uncontrolled mind goes towards attachment. If my mind had been uncontrolled, I
would be attached and wanting to enjoy. I am detached. I am renouncing. It is
not that my mind is uncontrolled. It is your mind that is uncontrolled. Because
of which, you cannot see the ghastly karma that we have done. And then, the
discussion goes on and on. And finally, there is no resolution to it. It is
finally, when they go to Bhishma Pitamah. And Bhishma Pitamah speaks. And
Bhishma Pitamah gives, He gives various, tells various schools of thought.
These people say this. These people say this. And ultimately, he says that,
actually, what is the right course of action? It is doing the will of the Lord.
So, it is the Lo..., will's, Lord's will that this battle took place. So, that
is why the battle took place. And you are a part of that. Now, it is the Lord's
will that you become the king. So, therefore, become the king.

So, in this way, essentially, what he says that, be the, be a part in the Lord's
plan. Nobody can understand the Lord's plan. But if we act according to Lord's
plan. Lo..., a, the Lord will ultimately bring about everything auspicious for
us. And Bhishma Pitamah gives an example of himself. He says, you know, I had
such a difficult service, fighting against the Lord. Who would want to do such a
service? But I did that. And now, what is the reward?

        tathāpy ekānta-bhakteṣu
        paśya bhūpānukampitam
        yan me ’sūṁs tyajataḥ sākṣāt
        kṛṣṇo darśanam āgataḥ

So, he says, "tathāpy ekānta-bhakteṣu". Because I remained His one-pointed
devotee. Doing whatever He wanted me to. "paśya bhūpānukampitam". "paśya bhūpā".
Oh, king, just see. "ānukampitam". Just see His mercy on me. What is His mercy?
"yan me ’sūṁs tyajataḥ sākṣāt". "tyajataḥ sākṣāt". When I am about to leave my
body. "kṛṣṇo darśanam āgataḥ". Krishna Himself has come to give me darshan. Such
is His blessing. So, the Lord will bless. So, do not doubt. Do not doubt. And
just do the will of the Lord. So, the point is, "kavayo ’py atra mohitāḥ". Even
the wise get bewildered. Even Yudhiṣṭhira, who is Dharmaraja. Who answered
questions of yaksha, of the, of Dharmara..., dharma, who was acting as a yaksha
in the forest. Yudhiṣṭhira was so learnt that actually even the brahmanas were
impressed by his learning. The sages were impressed by his learning. But even
Yudhiṣṭhira was bewildered. About  what is the actual duty to do? So, Krishna is
telling that, "kavayo ’py atra mohitāḥ". Of course, this incident of Yudhiṣṭhira
getting bewildered is going to come after the Mahabharata. This Bhagavad Gita
has been spoken before the Mahabharata war, Kurukshetra war. But the point is,
this is something which always keeps happening. Should we act? Or should we not
act? As Shakespeare said in one of his plays. You know, to do, or not to do?
That is the question. So, there is always the question, how we should act in
life. And "kavayo ’py atra mohitāḥ". So, Prabhupada quotes that:

        Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam

Actually, he says, we cannot determine it by our own efforts. We have to know it
from the Lord. So, we have to know it from the scripture. So, let us l..., but
scripture also teaches many things. So, Krishna goes on and says. Now, I will
tell you further. I will tell you three things. What are these three things?

        karmaṇo hy api boddhavyaṁ
        boddhavyaṁ ca vikarmaṇaḥ
        akarmaṇaś ca boddhavyaṁ
        gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ

So, "karmaṇo hy api boddhavyaṁ". "boddhavyaṁ" means know. Know ko..., what is
karma. Then, know what is vikarma. And "akarmaṇaś ca boddhavyaṁ". Know what is
akarma. "gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ". The working of karma is "gahanā", is complex. It
is incom..., almost incomprehensible. Very difficult to understand. "gahanā" is
dense. Or dark. Or difficult to fathom. Difficult to penetrate with our
intellect. So, He says, the way karma works is very difficult to understand. But
essentially, you understand three things. What do you understand? What is your
karma? What is vikarma? And what is akarma? So, we have discussed these three
in our Isopanishad study, at the beginning of this course, in Mantra Three. When
we discussed about, Mantra Two, we discussed.

        kurvann eveha karmāṇi
        jijīviṣec chataṁ samāḥ
        evaṁ tvayi nānyatheto 'sti
        na karma lipyate nare

There, Prabhupada explains, karma is, that is, it is, refers to the actions
which brin..., bring good reactions. Vikarma is actions which are against
scripture.  Which bring bad reactions. And akarma is not inaction. Akarma is
action that brings no reaction. So, Krishna is saying, the whole system of
karma, which action will bring what reaction. And what reaction is coming
because of which action. All that is very complex to understand. But
essentially, understand three things. Understand that certain, that certain
actions produce good reactions. Certain actions produce bad reactions. And
certain actions bring no material reactions. So, then, Krishna will recommend,
after this, to do akarma. So, Krishna starts this explanation by first giving a,
a termi..., terms to understand. And after these terms, then He moves forward.
And He talks about other things. So, now, here, Krishna uses Upanishadic style
where things are co..., you know, put in a complex way to titillate and this,
you know, tickle the minds of the intellectuals. Th..., so:

        karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed
        akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ
        sa buddhimān manuṣyeṣu
        sa yuktaḥ kṛtsna-karma-kṛt

So, "karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed". So, first, I will tell the literal meaning.
Then, we will see how the literal meaning is confusing. And then, we will see
how the meaning can be clarified. So, "karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed". So,
"karmaṇy" means in action. Now, "yaḥ paśyed" means he, who sees. One who sees.
So, one who sees. "karmaṇy". That is action. "k...", "akarma" is inaction. So,
one who sees inaction in action. Hmm. So, inaction in action. One who sees k...,
in "karmaṇy", "akarma". And then, "akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ". One who sees action
in inaction. So, in akarma, that is, i..., "akarmaṇi ca". That means in
inaction, one who sees action. "sa". Such a person is "buddhimān", "manuṣyeṣu".
Such a person is "buddhimān". And such a person is "yuktaḥ". Such a person will
be well-situated, well-connected. "kṛtsna-karma-kṛt". Even if such a person does
different kinds of work. So, the, Krishna is saying, that if a person, you
understand what is action. And what is inaction. Then, even if you do a...,
different kinds of actions, like fighting a war. Still, such a person will be
"yuktaḥ". Such a person will be well-situated, connected for attaining the
Absolute Truth. Such a person is "buddhimān". Now, when we hear the verse like
this. We will understand that we are not "buddhimān". You know, one who sees
action in inaction. And inaction in action. Such a person is wise. Now, this,
you, this, this translation as well as this verse is a trongue, you know,
trongue, tongue twister and a brain twister. Both. Tongue twister. You know, one
who sees action in inaction and inaction in action. To say this will be
difficult. Action in inaction and inaction in action. What does it mean? So,
first of all, saying it is a tongue twister. And then, it is a brain twister.
What does it actually mean? So, to understand what it means, we will have to
first understand that the word karma and the word akarma have multiple meanings.

So, let us look at the meanings of the word karma and akarma. Ok. So, first of
all, what does the word karma? It can have four meanings. First of all, karma
can mean action. In general, when we do some work, we are doing karma. That is
action. And s..., you know, the word karma can also mean reaction. Reaction
means, then, I do some action. And I get some reaction. So, we say sometimes.
Oh, I am suffering because of my karma. Then, we are not suffering because of
our karma in terms of action. We are suffering in terms of reactions. Why am I
sick now? That is because of my karma. So, that is, we are talking of karma as
reactions. Then, we also use karma to refer to the system of action-reaction.
So, we have, nobody can escape karma. Nobody can escape the law of karma. So,
here, we are referring to the law of karma. Here, we are referring to, you know,
the system action-reaction. That is called as kar..., l..., also known by the
name of karma. And then, karma can also refer to one category within the three
kinds of actions. You know, what Krishna referred to in the previous verse. In
4.16, He says, "karmaṇo hy api boddhavyaṁ". So, there are three kinds of karma.
There is karma, vikarma, and akarma. So, karma can refer to pious action, also.
So, in this way, the word karma can have four meanings. Action, reaction, system
of action-reaction, and one kind of action that is pious action. Similarly, the
word akarma can have two meanings. One is inaction. Hmm. And, so, the, so, now,
the system of, now, that will be, these two meanings are based on the first two
m..., you know, meanings over here. They made into converse. So, first, a
meaning of a..., karma is action. Then, akarma is inaction. And then, the second
meaning of karma, akarma will be action that produces no reaction. So, action
that produces no reaction. Now, how can action not produce any reaction? When we
do action on our own behalf, that produces reaction. But when we do action on
Krishna's behalf, that does not produce any reaction. How is that? We have
gi..., we discussed the example, Prabhupada would often give that, if a soldier
goes in the war field and kills the enemy. At that time, the soldier is not
killed. The soldier is not punished. In fact, soldier may be rewarded. The
soldier is acting on behalf of the nation. If the soldier comes home and has a
quarrel with the neighbor. And shoots the neighbor. The soldier may put to 
gallows for that. So, the point is that there are certain actions which we are
doing on behalf of a higher authority. And if we do act on behalf of the Lord,
then we do not become bound by those actions. But if we do not act on the behalf
of the Lord. When we act for our own sake, then we do get bound. We do get
bound. So, there is a difference between the two. So, ina..., so, action that
produces no reaction means action which we do on behalf of Krishna. Then,
because we are acting on behalf of Krishna, we do not get bound by those
actions. So, with these understanding of the words karma and akarma. Now, let us
look at what the verse means.

So, this, 4.18, "karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed". So, in action, do "karmaṇy akarma
yaḥ paśyed". So, to see inaction in action. So, here, what does it mean? Here,
akarma means not inaction in terms of inactivity. Here, it means, no karmic
reaction. So, "karmaṇy" refers to activity. Or more pre..., precisely, external
activity. So, see in external activity no karmic reaction. So, what it means is
that, one who sees that, yeah, this kind of activity a person is doing, but
their activity will not produce any reaction. And the example is, in this case,
Arjuna's fighting. It will lead to no karmic reaction. Because Arjuna is not
acting on one's own behalf. He is acting under the instruction of the Lord. So,
k..., this is "karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed". "karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed". One who
sees that in action, there is actually no reaction going to come. There is no
karmic reaction. It is, it is actually non-reactionary work. So, here, "karmaṇy"
refers to action. In general, action. The first meaning of the word action,
among the four meanings. Any kind of action that the person does. But akarma
refers to, not inaction. It is not that action is inaction. Somebody is doing
action. And still, that person is not being in action. No. That person is doing
action. But akarma refers to that there is no reacion going to come. Why?
Because it is being done on behalf of the Lord. So, normally, for sannyasis,
say, it is, sannyasis have actually broken free from the bondages of the world,
at least externally. And they are not meant to get back into the bondage. That
is why it is said that sannyasis should not cross the ocean. And go to the lands
across the oceans. Because they will get bound by karma. How they will get
bound? Because those areas are said to be very materialistic. Very
contaminated. And the ksa..., the, and the sannyasis may also get material
desires. And then, those material desires will act as contaminations, they will
cause the, they may cause their fall down, also. So, the normal, the traditional
Hindu standard was that sannyasis should not cross the ocean and go to the lands
over there. So, that is true at one level. It, the sannyasis have to be careful
about bad association. Because they do not want to get contaminated. But Srila
Prabhupada had this vision. "karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed". Prabhupada saw that I
am not going there for any ma..., an..., purpose of material enjoyment. I am
going there for the service of the Lord. I am going there for, you know, giving
Krishna's message. And telling a..., and sharing Krishna's love with people over
there. So, although he went to America. Did he become contaminated? Far from
that. He went to the most contaminated places. And he transformed them into
Vaikuntha. He manifested the spiritual world wherever he went. So, "karmaṇy
akarma yaḥ paśyed". So, Prabhupada had that vision that even wherever he went,
he transformed that into spiritual world. You know, one time, the devotees took
Srila Prabhupada for a morning walk. And somehow, they missed the roads. They
were also new. And then, they were supposed to go to a park. But they came into
slum area. So, it was quite a, a, it was, you know, dirty. And it was smelly.
And it was not at all, you know, aesthetically pleasing. The devotees
apolo..., Prabhupada, we are sorry we brought you to such a place. Prabhupada
said no. This is Vaikuntha. You know. Vaikuntha? What do you mean? Prabhupada
said, you know, wherever the devotees are, and we are all together. And we are
discussing Krishna Katha. That is Vaikuntha.

        yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ

        tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada

So, actually, where a devotee goes. Devotee may go to a filthy place, also. But
the devotee is interested in glorifying Krishna. And that glorification of
Krishna transforms that place to the transcendental level. So, "karmaṇy akarma
yaḥ paśyed". And then, "akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ". "akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ" means
what? 37:02
