Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JDeq6EjpcEs
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_045_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Text_15_to_25_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=_STS2MJI8nguQRRnkoKCjsJovNd8MTU0ODQ4NzAyOUAxNTQ4NDAwNjI5&event=video_description&v=JDeq6EjpcEs

Hare Krishna.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we continue with the first chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We discussed
till verses four, verse fourteen yesterday. So, first, Bhish..., you know,
Duryodhana spoke, assessing the strength of both the armies. Then, Bhishma blew
his conchshell. The remaining Kauravas blew their conchshells. And now, Krishna
and Arjuna, the focus is on them. And they are blowing their conchshell. So, let
us look at the verse. Let us see here.

        pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo
        devadattaṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ
        pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ
        bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ

So, both of them are blowing their conchshells. "pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo". Lord
Hṛṣīkeśa blew his Pāñcajanya, his conchshell. And Dhanañjaya is Krishna...,
is Arjuna. And he blew his conchshell, named Devadatta. And then similarly,
"pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ". So, the giant "śaṅkhaṁ", "mahā-śaṅkhaṁ". You
know, Bhima himself was giant-bodied. His strength was like that of a giant. And
his paraphernalia was also like that of a giant. So, "mahā-śaṅkhaṁ", his
conchshell was giant. So, "pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau", and its name was Pauṇḍra.
"bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ". So, "Bhīma", the name itself means her..., let us say,
hercules. One who is extremely strong. So, in English, there is a word called
Herculean. So, Hercules is a character from the Greek tradition. Greek or Roman
tradition. And there, the idea is of a person who could get giant strength. And
he could do huge amount of work. So, many of the characters in the Greek or
Roman tradition, they are derivatives from the Vedic tradition. And in fact, if
we look at the thoughts of Socrates. You know, When Socrates' brother, Socrates'
friend's wife passes away. And his wif..., brother is lamenting, Socrates
consorts him by giving five reasons for the immortality of the soul. And those
reasons are practically identical with the first chap..., with the second
chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna is telling Arjuna about the
immortality of the soul. So, basically, after the Kurukṣetra war, from the
Indian mainland, there were expatriates. You know, which went away. People who
left the country. And they went to various parts, settled down in various part.
And they, they were settled in various parts. But over the centuries as the
power of the Kurukṣetra king, power of the king of Hastinapur became weaker
and weaker, the connection with the parent culture became more tenuous. And then
some local cultural derivatives also came out. That is why there are
similarities between the Vedic culture and the other cultures of the world. And
there are differences also. So, the Vedic patriarchs considered the Greek or
Roman culture to be an expatriate Vedic civilisation. Srila Prabhupada was
tal..., talks about this. And it is mentioned in līlāmṛta also. So, you know,
he, "bhīma-karmā", so, his name is Bhīma. But he was, karma was also Bhīma. And
here, he is referred to as, not by the name of Bhīma. He is referred to by
another name, "vṛkodaraḥ". "udaraḥ" means stomach. And then, "udaraḥ", "vṛka" is
giant, huge. So, "vṛka-udaraḥ" refers to, as Prabhupada translated, voracious
eater. So, voracious eater. Now, Bhīma, he was extremely powerful. And now,
power does not come out of thin air. You know, a person who does a lot of
powerful work, need, gets that power by eating. So, after Draupadī's svayaṃvara
was performed, in which Arjuna won her hand. And then, they came back. And when
they came back, then Arjuna told her, Smadra Kuntī was waiting anxiously. He
says I have got a special gift for you. So, he said, so, Kuntī, she was doing
her prayers. And without looking, she says, whatever you have got, share it with
your brothers. And take it. So, he was shocked. He did not know what to do. All
of them were stunned. And seeing the numb silence. And seeing the numb silence
behind her, Kuntī turned and asked, what is the matter? And then, she saw
Draupadī. You know, princesses dressed in the royal, robes of, for the occasion
of marriage. He says, I have got a bride for you. I have got a wife. He says,
they are all shocked. That Kuntī said that, you know, my words have never been
false. And Yudhiṣṭhira also started thinking about it. And then, he said 05:15
