Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvQL0aUyl8o
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_077_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_15_to_18_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=Ne7qrU06tV9Hl7_qhmEO8Lfxzud8MTU0ODQ4ODA5NUAxNTQ4NDAxNjk1&event=video_description&v=VvQL0aUyl8o

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. Today,
we will discuss the Fifth Chapter. We discussed till the middle of the second
section of the Bha..., Fifth Chapter. Let us look at the section overview. Then,
we will move forward and discuss further. So, the first section is kali-yu...,
karma-yoga is equal to, but easier than jnana-yoga. Then, Krishna is elaborating
how the karma-yogi can also attain freedom from bondage. So, then, by fixing the
mind on atma, karma-yogi remains free from bondage. And that is seven to
sixteen. So, we are in the middle of that right now. Then, next section will be,
by fixing mind on Paramatma, karma-yogi attains liberation. So, we will discuss
that s..., today, also. And, this, this verse is, short chapter, 29 verses among
all the chapters that we haved discussed till now, this is the shorter chapter.
First Chapter had, you know, 46 verses. Second had 72. Third had, you know, 43.
Fourth had 42. So, this has 29 verses. So, some of the chapters are short. The
shortest, you know, the chapter is which have 20 verses. So, 15th Chapter has 20
verses which is among the shortest chapters. Similarly, 12th Chapter also has 20
verses. Although these two chapters are short. They are, you know, by far among the most
important chapters of the Gita. 12th Chapter is bhakti-yoga. 15th Chapter is
Purushottama Yoga. This chapter is Karma Sanyasa Yoga. So, let us go on with our
discussion of verses. So, we discussed till fourteenth verse. The fourteenth
verse was saying that, the s..., you know, that the soul is not the doer.
"svabhāvas tu pravartate". "svabhāvas". Material nature. That was what it was
saying. So, now, somebody may say, b..., but "svabhāvas", actually, doesn't,
isn't there some ultimate cause? You know. Is the Supreme Lord responsible? Ok,
if I am born as a, you know, shudra. And I act like a shudra. Then, is the
Supreme, the Supreme Lord has made me as the shudra. So, then, Is He responsible
for the way I am made? So, if I act according to the way I am me..., I am made,
then, is He responsible? So, that is the point which is addressed in this verse.

        nādatte kasyacit pāpaṁ
        na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ
        ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ
        tena muhyanti jantavaḥ

"nādatte". "ādatte" means ac..., "ādatte" means to accept. "nādatte". The Lord
does not accept. "kasyacit pāpaṁ". "kasyacit" means anyone. The Lord does not
accept anyone's "pāpaṁ". "na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ". Nor does he steal anyone's
punya. That means the Lord is not responsible for anybody's, you know, pi...,
sinful or pious activities. Then, what is making the living entity act in that
way? "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". So, the "jñānaṁ" of the living entity is covered by
"ajñānenāvṛtaṁ". The similar word "āvṛtaṁ" was used with, by Krishna with
respect to descri..., lust. When He was talking about how "āvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ".

        āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena
        jñānino nitya-vairiṇā

So, He talked about this in response to Arjuna's question in 3.36. So, He
sa..., this is 3.39. Now, after describing this, "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". So,
"ajñānena" is covering the "jñānaṁ". Of whom? "tena muhyanti jantavaḥ".
"jantavaḥ" is the living entity. The conditioned soul. "jantavaḥ". The soul who
is covered by the body and the mind is called the conditioned soul. So, that
soul is referred to as a living entity or the "jantavaḥ". "tena muhyanti". The
"muhyanti" is, the soul is put into illusion. Now, let us look at these two
parts of the verse. First part is saying that, the Supreme Lord is not
responsible for anyone's good or bad actions. He does not accept the reactions.
He does not acc..., accept, He does not accept the actions. He does not accept
the reactions. You know, now, of course, when a devotee surrenders to Krishna,
the Lord takes away the sinful reactions. Even the pious reactions the Lord
takes away. But we are not talking about bhakti over here. Krishna has not taken
this chapter to the point of bhakti till now. So, what is He talking about? He
is talking about, you know, the consciousness of a karma-yogi. And as contrasted
to that, with the consciousness of a karmi. So, when an ordinary materialistic
person is working. Or when a karma-yogi is working. The focus is not Krishna.
So, at that time, the Lord does not get directly involved. So:

        nādatte kasyacit pāpaṁ
        na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ

Lord does not accept anyone's good or bad activities. Just like a judge, the
judge does not accept anyone, the criminal's crime, nor the m..., victim's
compensation. He does not, the judge does not accept the cri..., criminal's
punishment. Nor the, you know, victim's co..., you know, compensation.
Redressal. The judge does whatever is required according to the merits of the
case. Same with the Supreme Lord. Now, the question may come up. You know. Ok.
At one level, he said, the soul is not the doer. Another level, it is said that,
actually, the Lord is not the doer. Then, "svabhāvas tu pravartate". It was
said. "svabhāvaḥ". So, the, it is the nature that is the doer. Then, the
question comes up, wh..., where does this nature come from? What is this nature,
actually? "svabhāvas tu pravartate". He says. That is described as
"ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". That "ajñānena". By ignorance, "āvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". Sorry.
Here, it is said:

        ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ
        tena muhyanti jantavaḥ

So, you know by the covering of ignorance, the living entity gets deluded. And
by, based on that illusion, the living entity acts in self-defeating or even
self-destructive ways. Self-defeating means because harm to oneself.
Self-destruction means, the, if a soul acts in a way that causes the soul to
lose its human body, goes into lower species. That is called atmaha. The killer
of the soul. The spiritual path, prospects of the soul have been lost for a long
time by such a, such misdeeds. So, the self-defeating means the soul is trying
to make spiritual advancement. But the soul makes long s..., long choices. And
defeats oneself. So, both of these can happen. Self-defeating, you know, and
self-destructive activities. But they all happen because of "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ". So,
what is this "ajñān"? It can be analysed in different ways. You know, we can
call, refer to it as lust. Lust is one type of "ajñān". Pro..., you know, ab...,
ahankāra, arrogance is another type of "ajñān". So, these are various. They are
called as anarthas. Anarthas means those which have no artha. Artha means value,
or meaning, or value. So, they do not have any values. They do not have any
meaning. So, these are anarthas. Then, we can also refer to discu..., discu...,
a..., "ajñāna" in terms of the three modes. There is goodness, passion,
ignorance. So, they also create a kind of ignorance. These are, can be seen from
different perspectives. The point is, the soul forgets, you know, you know, who
I am. And takes on a false sense of identity. So, the soul forgets that, I am
the soul, a part of Krishna, meant to serve Krishna. The soul starts thinking
that I am mean..., I am meant to enjoy in this world. So, I am a male. I am a
female. I am an Indian. I am an American. I am a, a, you know, I am
fair-skinned. I am dark-skinned. Whatever. All these misconceptions come based
on the body. "tena muhyanti jantavaḥ". So, by this, the living entity becomes
bewildered. So, now, let us look at this once again. The soul, there are three
parties involved. There is soul. There is the Supreme Lord. And then, there is
the material nature. So, now, Krishna has said, "svabhāvas tu pravartate" in the
previous verse. So, you know, now, if "svabhāvas tu pravartate", if nature is
doing everything, does that mean that we are helpless? And so we are not
responsible? No. Nature is doing, making, going to make us act in certain ways.
But even within the natural urges, there are certain urges, or certain, certain
pushings we can say, which can be dovetailed. And certain things which have to
be curtailed. So, you know, what are the things that, you have to be, cur...,
you know, dovetailed? Which can be dovetailed? So, for example, acco..., one's
varanic propensities, one's, whether one is brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, shudra.
So, these are propensities. And they can be dovetailed in Krishna's service. So,
on the other hand, there are the inclinations of lust, anger, greed, envy, pride
and illusion. They need to be curtailed. So, certain things need to be
dovetailed. Certain things need to be curtailed. So, you know, the, both of
these, we could say, they result from our material identification. You know,
from our situation in the body. And our identification with the body. But some
of them can be utilised. Some of them have to be controlled. Now, in one sense,
even a brahmana, the per..., if the person thinks that I am a brahmana. That is
also an "ajñān". And then, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says:

        nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir

That I am not a brahmana. I am not a ksatriya. Like that, he rejects
identification with all varanas, and all the ashramas. He says, I am simply the
servant of Krishna. Servant of the Lord of the gopis, he says. So, that is true
at a pure liberated level. At the sadhaka level, we understand intellectually.
We accept in principle that I am, I am a soul. But then, I understand my body
has a particular nature. So, then, I, I act according to the nature. But when I
act according to my bodily nature. I do not become infatuated, or dejected, or
elated by whatever I do with the body. So, if I am a brahmana. And I can speak
very eloquently. Or I can remember a lot. Then, if I become infatuated. Oh, you
know, it is so good. I am so clever. And then, I become elated. When I am able
to do things. And people praise me. Then, I am, become "kartāham iti manyate".
On the other hand, if I am a brahmana. But I somehow do not have such a good
memory. I do not have such a good speaking ability. Then, I have become elated.
Oh, I am good for noth..., and, I may become dejected. Oh, I am good for
nothing. But that is also another form of illusion. So, whatever the bodily
faculties I have, I will use them in Krishna's service. And that way, I will
make steady spiritual advancement. Now, when I make spiritual advancement in
this way, I will move forward steadily. And ultimately return to Kri..., a,
Krishna, once we, I transcend the modes. So, that, this is how every a..., every
aspirant in the varnashrama system should think. Whether bra..., brahmana,
ksatriya, vaisya, shudra, they all can engage in the path of transcendence
according to their natures. And they can eventually attain liberation. So, the
"ajñān". The "ajñān" is definitely there. B..., but the "ajñān" has to be a,
different aspects of "ajñān" have to be dealt with differently. So, now, whether
a person is a ksatriya, or a vaisy..., a vaisya, or shudra. Everybody has lust.
You know, even brahmana has lust. Now, now, different people in the different
a..., varnas, different ashramas, they will deal with lust differently. But they
all have to regulate lust to some extent. You know, they have to regulate lust
to some extent. So, lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, and illusion, you know,
they, the extent to which they can be expressed, they will vary. So, a ksatriya,
ca..., a, general, can have polygamy, also. Can have many wives. And can live in
opulent palaces. Can have a lot of wealth, also. That is within the varanic
duties. And the varanic f..., f..., you know, arrangement. Varanic mean..., I am
using as an adjective for varana. So, within the arrangement of varana, that is
perfectly. That is accepted within the scriptures. So, you know, when Krishna is
saying, "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ". Yes, we are covered by knowl..., by ignorance.
And that ignorance makes us behave in particular ways. Now, when we identify
with those ways of behavior. And think that that is our essence. And let our
desires be caught completely in what we are seeking according to our bodily
nature, then we will become entangled. But when we understand, yes, this is my
bodily nature. This is how I will act. But I am different from all this. I am a
soul. And as a soul, I meant to love and serve Krishna. Then, the bondage will
be now there. In fact, when we work in that way, we will stay free from bondage.
So, now, Krishna will talk about how to come free fro..., become free from
"ajñāna".

So, Prabhupada here contrasts th word "vibhuḥ" in this verse with the word
"prabhuḥ" in the previous verse. The "prabhuḥ" means to living entity who is
thinking I am the Lord of the nat..., Lord of this body. But "vibhuḥ" is Supreme
Lord. "vibhuḥ" means one who is great. He is full of. Prabhupada talks about the
six opulences. And then, Prabhupada says that the, you know, living entity being
in a bewildered condition. "ajñānenāvṛtaṁ". "muhyanti"

"therefore, the embodied soul identiﬁes himself with the circumstantial material
body and becomes subjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life."

So, circumstantial material body. Normally, we may think of circumstantial, you
know, jo..., or by circumstantial meeting. But from the point of view of
eternity, the mor..., material body is also circumstantial. Just temporarily, we
have got it. Certain circumstances, because certain circumstances, certain
desires came up in our mind. Those desires, we developed. And we had become
attached to those things. Then, we developed a certain kind of, you know,
thought process at the time of death. And accordingly, we got this body. So, it
is all, ci..., it is largely circumstantial. Of course, we are not victims of
circumstances. We cooperate with the circumstances. We also chose desires
accordingly. So, in that sense, i..., i..., we are also partially responsible.
But the word cir..., use of the word circumstantial emphasises that there is
nothing intrinsic that connects us with the body. We are different from the
body. And then, Prabhupada now quotes h..., various, you know, interesting
verses. So, one is, let us look at these verses which Prabhupada quotes over
here. "Kauṣītakī Upaniṣad", Prabhupada is quoting.

        eṣa u hy eva sādhu karma kārayati taṁ yam ebhyo lokebhya unninīṣate. eṣa u evāsādhu karma kārayati yam adho ninīṣate

        eṣa u hy eva sādhu karma kārayati taṁ yam ebhyo lokebhya unninīṣate

Now, "eṣa", "eṣa" is that Absolute Truth. Prabhupada translates that as Lord.
"sādhu karma kārayati". So, that, that Lord makes the living entity to do good
activities. And "taṁ eva", "taṁ yam ebhyo lokebhya unninīṣate". "unninīṣate".
"unninīṣate" is a rela..., can be related with the word "unyanti". Progress. It
is there anything. So, "unninīṣate" means to progress. You know, elevates the
living entity. "eṣa u evāsādhu karma kārayati". "āsādhu karma". That is
inaus..., impious activities. And then, "ninīṣate". "ninīṣate", you know, is
lower. The lower, living entity may go to the lower places. So, now, this verse
may raise a question. Does the Lord engage us in good activities or bad
activities? Or do we engage ourselves? Both are there. Actually, you know,
unless the Lord sanctions, nothing will happen. But it is we who desire. So,
after we desire, the Lord engages accordingly. The emphasis on this verse is
that, again, and Prabhupada is quoting this "Kauṣītakī Upaniṣad" verse. He
emphasises on the point that the Lord is f..., facilitating us. The Lord is not,
per say, primar..., fac..., engaging us. The Lord is facilitating our desires.
And Prabhupada also quotes here. Sometimes, Prabhupada gives verses which are,
you know, m..., m..., which are unreferenced. And then, the devotee has not been
able to find references. Then, the devotee has not put any references over
there. So, Prabhupada has written, left certain verses like that.

        ajño jantur anīśo ’yam
        ātmanaḥ sukha-duḥkhayoḥ
        īśvara-prerito gacchet
        svargaṁ vāśv abhram eva ca

So, the same point is made over here. "ajño jantur anīśo ’yam". "anīśo", "īśa"
means controller. "anīśo" means non-controller. So, this "jantur" is "ajño". And
is "anīśo ’yam", is ignorant, and is not, is not in control. And
"sukha-duḥkhayoḥ". "sukha-duḥkhayoḥ" means the way the misery and the happiness
will come. We are not in control. It is like, you know, suppose, a soldier is on
a battlefield. But soldier is on battlefield without any weapons. Weapons have
fallen off. And then, you know, right in the line of fire. So..., soldier is
helpless. Tuck. Tuck. Any moment, the bullet may come and knock the person
down. So, in many ways, we are like that. You know, any time, tuck. Some karmic
bullet come and can come, and hit us. You know, karmic bullet can be in the form
of adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika kleśas. And when these happen, they can
be very distressing. Very debilitating. Very devastating. So, you know, these
are, this is the way we are, you know, completely dependent. "anīśo ’yam". Now,
of course, we may say, we have a gun. I have determination. I have free will.
You know, I will, whenever problems come, I will deal with them. Yes. We, we
can. And we should deal with them according to our capacity. But our capacity
is also limited. Sometimes, if somebody is just living a normal life. And
suddenly, the person gets a terrible disease. You know, terminal disease. And
what can the person do? You know, we may go from one end of the globe to the
other. We check if some treatment is available. But if no treatment is
available. Then, the person has to accept. That yes. You know. What do we
accept? When we understand that I am not the body. I am the soul. Accept. Ok.
This ending is, is over. There is another ending is going to come. That if I am
pur..., if I am purified enough. Then, I may enter the spiritual world.
Otherwise, I will continue my sadhana-bhakti in this life. But if I do not
understand I am not the body, I am the soul. That can be so crushing. You know,
I am just, like, it is like a candle being extinguished. One blow by the, one
blow, just like a phew. We blow a candle. And the light gets extinguished. So,
like that, one blow by destiny, and we just end. That is what people feel. It is
actually very helplessness inducing. So, when we understand that ultimately,
w..., we are greater than our body. And our life is greater than this lifetime.
Then, that expands and enriches our conception of existence. And that is how,
that is the only thing that can bring us hope, a, when, again, when such, one is
in such grim situations. Other times, we may have some other hopes. Of course,
this, many of those hopes turn out to be false. But other hopes keep us going
con..., between the, even material, when we have no hope in material life. Then,
we need to have spiritual life. Otherwise, we will have no hope at all. So,
Prabhupada makes this very significant of, use phraseology over here.

"Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, causes his own bewilderment."

So, the immemorial desire. Immemorial means that which we just cannot know. When
it started. How it started. Immemorial. It has been a desire that has been going
on for a long long time. 20:01
