Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n3PMOdXwEb8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=n3PMOdXwEb8&event=video_description&redir_token=2eKhL0vQZkiegeY2eYxh0Q0PRZV8MTU0ODQ4NzA2N0AxNTQ4NDAwNjY3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_046_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Text_26_to_36_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

Hare Krishna.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. So, we continue with the first chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. We
have completed the first part of the first chapter. The chapter has two
divisions. Sanyan Vikshan Yoga and Arjuna Vishada Yoga. So, Sanyan Vikshan Yoga,
observing the armies. That is from one to twenty-five. And twenty-six to
forty-six, second part is Arjuna Vishada Yoga, Arjuna's lamentation. So, we will
start with that section now. So, here, we see, Arjuna speaking in twenty-six
verse. In the previous verse, Krishna has just spoken to Arjuna saying that you
wanted to come in-between the two armies? Yes. You can come now. I have brought
you here. And "paśy...", "pārtha paśyaitān". Oh, Arjuna. See. "paśyaitān". So,
he is "bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ". So, he has been brought in front of Droṇā,
Bhishma, and saying, see. So, then, this the third occurrence of the word see.
Now, the fourth occurrence is in this particular verse.

        tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ
        pitṝn atha pitāmahān
        ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn
        putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā
        śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva
        senayor ubhayor api

"tatrāpaśyat", so, there, he could see. "sthitān pārthaḥ", they were situated.
Who were there? His whole, his several generations of relatives were there.
"pitṝn atha pitāmahān". So, normally, you know, when a family get together, gets
together, it is a joyful occasion. And even nowadays, if you see, a family
get-together is sometimes even for the, today, with both the husband and the
wife working sometimes. You know for the husband, wife and children to get
together, itself is sometimes difficult. But for the, for the children, the
parents, and the grandparents to get together, that is almost like a rare
occasion. So, now, is three generations coming together is often rare nowadays.
But here, we have five generations coming together. So, that is a family
get-together, it is normally a joyous occasion. But this is a very grievous
occasion. It is, you know, because the family is getting together not for
some celebration, but it is for destruction, mutual destruction. So, these f...,
what are these five generations? "pitṝn atha pitāmahān". So, "pitṝn" is the
people who are in his father's generation. So, for example, there is Shalya who
is the relative of Madri who is his mother. So, who is the, like a stepmother,
the mother of Nakula and Sahadeva. So, there, we see that in the father's
generation. And then we also have in the father's generation other people, also,
several other people. There is Bhurishravas and his father. So, both of them are
there. So, that is another generation which is older. And then we have Bhishma
Pitamah who is in the grandfather's generation. So, "ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn".
So, "ācāryān" refers to his teachers. So, they are his, two teachers, Kṛpacarya
and Droṇācārya. Both of them taught. Although, Droṇācārya is the prominent
teacher. But Kṛpacarya is also an ācārya. He also taught in the gurukulā, a
little bit, not so much. "mātulān". "mātulān" is maternal uncle. So, this refers
to Shakuni. So, he is the, not directly the maternal uncle. Maternal uncle in
the sense, stepmother's brother. So, then, "bhrātṝn", the brothers, yes, so,
whole hundred Pa..., Kauravas are their brothers. And "putrān pautrān sakhīṁs
tathā". So, "putrān" refers to sons. So, there, there, there is Duryodhana's
sons were also there in the battlefield. So, they are like Arjuna's sons. And
actually, by that time, Duryodhana was old enough that his "pautrān" were also
there. His grandsons were also there. You know, on this side also, Abhimanyu was
by the time of the war, he was already married. And Abhimanyu had already
impregnated Subha..., Uttara. And from her, you know, Pariksit was born. So,
Pariksit was born after the war. But the point is that, there were other people
in that generation of Abhimanyu who were old enough to be married. And who had
already begotten children. And you know, those children were not necessarily
small. They were also on the battlefield. So, "putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā".
And his friends were there. Who were the friends? You know, Kŗtavarmā was a
friend for him. And Aśvatthāmā was also a friend. Aśvatthāmā and Arjuna were
together in the gurukulā. And both were expert archers. Although, A..., there
was some envy in Aśvatthāmā's heart for Arjuna. Because Aśvatthāmā had wanted to
be the best student of his father. But Arjuna had defeated him, and excelled
him. But still, they were close friends while they were in the gurukulā. So:

        śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva

And fathers-in-law. And "suhṛdaś caiva", there were many others who were
actually his well-wishers. So, in this way, "senayor ubhayor api". So, all of
them assembled over there. And when he saw all of them. Now, the fathers-in-law
were not necessarily on the opposite side. The fathers-in-law were on his side,
also. He saw Draupadī's father, Drupada. He was around in the battlefield. So,
actually, even Arjuna came and saw. Arjuna was not just seeing the opposite
side. He saw his side, also. So, when he saw both sides, "atra pasyati", came in
the middle, his primary vision was "bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ". But he was
looking around. And he saw all of them. So, "senayor ubhayor api", in the middle
of the two armies. Then, what happened? So, then:

        tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ
        sarvān bandhūn avasthitān
        kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo
        viṣīdann idam abravīt

"tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ". So, again, here, we have the word "īkṣya" coming
for the fifth time, seeing. 

        tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ
        sarvān bandhūn avasthitān

All of them were relatives. "avasthitān", he was situated. "kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo".
So, he was overcome by emotions, strong emotions. So, here, the, he is talking
about the emotion as compassion. And "parayā", he is very strong. So, here,
"parayā" is not, "para", it is not transcendental compassion. It is material.
But w..., "ā parayā", it is so strong that is overwhelming. And that is why it
is "āviṣṭo". "āviṣṭo" means, it, overwhelming, came over him. He came under the
vasa of that. That put him in his, in its vasa. And "viṣīdann idam abravīt". And
then, "viṣīdann" means lamenting. So, when that compassion came upon him, it
made him lament. And when he was speaking, he spoke at that time. "idam
abravīt", these were the words he spoke. So, we see that, the perception shapes
the emotion tremendously. Now, what we see affects us. Of course, all the senses
affect us, whatever perception come via our senses. But vision affects us,
emotion quite strongly. And when Arjuna sees, immediately, his emotions get
affected. And we will see the contrast between his perce..., his thinking
earlier and his thinking now. So, let us look at the next verse. Here, for the
first time in the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna has now started speaking in a prolonged
sequence. Earlier, he has just spoken "senayor ubhayor madhye". Now, I will
speak several verses over here. So:

        arjuna uvāca

        dṛṣṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa
        yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam
        sīdanti mama gātrāṇi
        mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati

So, when, now, the first thing that we observe is that his whole perception has
changed. Earlier, he was saying that, there were:

        dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher
        yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ

Who are the friends of that evil-minded Duryodhana? Who have come to assist him?
So, those whose idea was, those who are assisted that evil-minded person, they
will also be evil-minded. But those who was earlier talking about
"dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher", now, suddenly, he is, he calls them as
"sva-janaṁ". "sva-janaṁ", they are my people. So, earlier, he was saying, oh,
they are Duryodhana's people. They are on Duryodhana's side. And Duryodhana is
evil-minded. But he says, oh, they are my people. "dṛṣṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa",
then, oh, Krishna, this is the first reference to also Krishna in the Bhagavad
Gita. The word, Krishna has been referred to as Acyuta, Hṛṣīkeśa, by many names.
But Krishna is very affectionate name. Generally, in the Mahabharata, the name
Krishna does not come as frequently as the name Keśava. Keśava is a little bit
more formal. Vasudeva is also name that comes. And those are the names by which.
Yadava is also there. So, he is often referred to by these names. Krishna
definitely comes, but not all that frequently. Krishna is a very intimate name.
So, "dṛṣṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa", He is, oh, now, I am seeing. Again, "dṛṣṭvā".
So, we see, another occurrence of the word, "seeing". And then, what is
happening by seeing? "yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam". They are my people. But they are
fighting against me. They are ready for fighting. "yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam". And
then, what is happening by that? "sīdanti mama gātrāṇi", all my limbs are
quivering. "mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati", and my mouth has dried up. So, here, we will
see that Arjuna is ge..., showing the symptoms of an emotional breakdown. He is
getting overwhelmed by strong emotions. "kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo" as it was said in
the previous verse. And now, that overwhelming compassion that has come over
him, that is having a physical effect. The physical effect is tr..., trembling.
"sīdanti mama gātrāṇi", and the throat is dried up. Actually, when the emotions
become very strong, then we hea..., start feeling a parching of the throat. So,
here, what we see, the Bhagavad Gita teaches a very important lesson, right from
its setting. That pratyaksha puts us into illusion. And sabda takes us out of
illusion. So, Arjuna was ready to fight. Arjuna had come on the battlefield to
do Krishna's will. But he says, "avekṣe ’haṁ", I want to see that r..., desire
for Pratyaksha Pramāṇa. And not just Pratyaksha Pramāṇa, o..., overreliance on
Pratyaksha Pramāṇa. That is the problem. See, we all have to use Pratyaksha
Pramāṇa. You know, it is not that Pratyaksha Pramāṇa has to be rejected. But
Pratyaksha Pramāṇa is not to be treated as all important. Pratyaksha Pramāṇa
means the Pramāṇa, wherein, we see..., sensory, we have, we get knowledge by
sensory perception. So, you know, Pramāṇa means, it is also valid. So,
Pratyaksha Pramāṇa is also a valid source of knowledge. You know, but it is not
the final source of knowledge. You know, for example, if we have, i..., if
somebody is caught doing something wrong. You know, if somebody is robbing
something. Or somebody is doing something, And then, the police come and catch
him. Hey, he says, do not believe in Pratyaksha Pramāṇa. You know, seeing is not
believing. That would be ridiculous. Isn't it?

So, Pratyaksha is definitely a valid way of acquiring knowledge. But it is not
the final way. And especially with respect to transcendental matters, where
Pratyaksha is not possible, practically speaking, then, Pratyaksha becomes
useless, largely speaking. Unless there is divya pratyaksha. That means our
spiritual consciousness awaken. And then, we sp..., perceive at a spiritual
level. So, when we are lea..., talking about, here, Pratyaksha. When there is
overreliance on Pratyaksha. And that overreliance on Pratyaksha causes a
forgetfulness of sabda. Then, it is a serious problem. So, Arjuna has become
overwhelmed by emotions. And when he is overwhelmed by emotions, that
overwhelming by emotions d..., disconnects him from his scriptural roots. It
uproots him from the ground of scriptural knowledge, where he has been rooted
till now. And he is just tossed around by the emotions. So, how the emotions
toss him around, we see. You know, we will see in the subsequent verses. But
here, the point is, all of us also, if we rely too much on Pratyaksha Pramāṇa.
If we will get unduly affected, we will get overly affected. So, certainly, we
do not have to close our eyes. Then, we do not have to reject what we see with
our eyes. But we also have to remember that what we see with our eyes, we have
to connect it with scripture. And based on scripture, make sense of things.
Otherwise, we will get overwhelmed. And we will be, get misled. So, sometimes,
the whole point of scriptural study is connect the specifics that we are
experiencing with the universal that are taught in scriptures. And then, learn
from that. We will discuss more about this in, when we discuss about
realisation, later in the Bhagavad Gita. But here, suffice it to say that
Pratyaksha has to be subordinated to sabda. So, pratyaksha puts Arjuna into
illusion. And it, sabda, that takes him out of illusion. Arjuna's credit is that
when pratyaksha starts dragging him into illusion, he does not immediately act
on it. What he does is, he consults. He consults. We contrast Arjuna's response
with Kaikeyī's response. You know, when Manthara started feeling poisoned to
Kaikeyī through the ears. She spoke. And Kaikeyī heard. You know, she was
dragged into illusion. Her whole perception was changed. She was thinking of
Rama as, as dear to her, as her own son, Bharata. But then, she started thinking
that, oh, Rama is my worst enemy. But her error was, she did not consult anyone.
Through pratyaksha, she got some information. Now, that pratyaksha may come from
the ears also. But it means pratyaksha in the sense that, it is sensory
perception. It is not scriptural knowledge. And instead of consulting anyone,
she decided immediately to act on it. So, in this world, we cannot avoid sensory
perception. We have to use sensory perception because we are living in the
world. And sometimes, sensory perception can be misleading. So, when we find
that the sensory perception is misleading, at that time, we have to consult
scripture. We have to consult guru, sadhu, shastra, and get a proper
understanding of the situation. So, Arjuna sets that example also that he now
moves towards a proper understanding. Let us see. What does he say? So, Srila
Prabhupada makes an interesting point in the purport that the:

".. symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness but to his softheartedness, a
characteristic of a pure devotee ..."

So, feeling emotion is not wrong. And here, the emotions are positive. They are
healthy. They are compa..., compassion is very noble emotion. When one sees
others suffering, or others about to suffer, at that time, we think, oh, why
should they suffer like this? Let them not suffer. And if I can avoid the
suffering, let me do what I can to avoid their suffering. So, thinking like this
is actually noble. And when he is doing this, it is very good. So, now, moving
forward from him. Let us see what Prabhupada quoted "yasyasti bhaktir", the
famous verse which says that devotees have good qualities. Now, Arjuna is
describing further the symptoms of his physical breakdown.

        vepathuś ca śarīre me
        roma-harṣaś ca jāyate
        gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt
        tvak caiva paridahyate

So, "vepathuś ca", "vepathuḥ" means that the hair on the body are standing up.
"śarīre me", the hair on the body are standing up. And "roma-harṣaś ca jāyate",
so, actually, "vepathuḥ" means hair. "vepathuḥ" means, "vepa" is trembling. So,
"vepathuḥ" is trembling of the body. The body is trembling. So, earlier, the
limbs were quiv..., quivering. But here, now, the whole body is trembling. And
s..., "roma-harṣaḥ". "roma-harṣaḥ" is, actually, the hair on the body is
standing. Now, Prabhupada will write that the hair on the body can stand because
of ecstasy or they can, because of in..., intense positive emotions, or intense
negative emotions. I am very happy that my hair stands on its end. Or I am very
scared. So, here, actually, Arjuna is scared. Not just scared for himself, but
scared for the bloodbath that is going to spread over the whole Kurukṣetra war.
And he is scared for the, fearful about the desctruction and death of so many of
his relatives. And "gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt". He is saying, so Arjuna has given
a first person report about what is happening over here. He is telling that, I
am observing Arjuna..., Krishna, I am talking with you. Against my will, the
Gāṇḍīva is slipping from my hand. You know, sometimes, we may see in movies
that, you know, somebody is just coming along in a house and then, they bring,
some ladies bringing a plate of food. And then, suddenly, she hears, oh, phone
comes, and yeah, ah, my husband has got a heart attack. And then what happens?
Tuck. The plate just falls. And she falls unconscious. So, what happens over
there is when emotions are very strong, we lose control over our physical
faculties. That, that plate may fall, and crash, and break. And the person also
falls after that. So, now, so, generally, emotions have physical effects more
quickly on females. You know, any females may cry immediately, much qui...,
much, of course, males may also cry. But emotions may affect, generally affect
females more quickly. For a male to get affected and in such a way that a
warrior, for a warrior to feel that my weapon is slipping off my hand. This is
extraordinarily, you know, harrowing experience. Harrowing means very
emotionally troubling. So, he is observing. He says, it is not that I want to
let go. It is not that I have to set and put. Slipping off my hands, just
cannot hold onto it. Oh, how was this happening? "gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt". And
then, "tvak caiva paridahyate". So, what was described in some parts of the body
earlier. You know, "mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati". He says, ok, my throat had dried up.
But he says, now, my whole body is burning. Tox..., whole skin, it is in, now,
in flame. Very strong emotions are there. And, and Arjuna is describing this
emotions. What is he trying to say? He is trying to convey through this to
Krishna how seriously he has been affected. You know, how strong his reaction is
in terms of "āviṣṭaḥ", in terms of how he is being overwhelmed. Now, Prabhupada
explains further that, now, he is telling, he is moving from the physical to the
mental. And now before we move to that, Prabhupada seems to give another
perspective over here. So, he becomes so impatient, "gāṇḍīvaṁ" was slipping. All
these are due to the material conception of life. Now, just in the previous
purport, Prabhupada said that, actually, all this is, Arjuna is a pure devotee.
And the compassion is a sign of a pure devotion, devotee. That is twenty-eighth
purport. And twenty-ninth purport is, all these are due to the material
conception of life. So, what exactly is happening over here?

Even the, we have to understand that when the scriptures are being narrated, or
when the events are happening within the Lord's pastimes and they are presented
in scripture. Now, there is no, the emphasize is not just on an absolute
deciding. This is right. Or this is wrong. 20:08


