Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yYdkbgPgbFY
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=fVIahxZMrT_HMwMQUhBSieaJVKx8MTU0ODQ4NzQ3OEAxNTQ4NDAxMDc4&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_058_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_63_to_70_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=yYdkbgPgbFY&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our study of the second chapter of the Bhagavad
Gita as a part of our Bhakti Shastri course. So, we will continue with our
discussion on 2.62-63, which we had started yesterday. We discussed about how
from "dhyāyato" to "praṇaśyati" is a sequence. Which can seem irreversible.
But it is not. We discussed the example of a horse. How the horse can be reined
in and controlled. And the earlier we do it, the better it is. You know, now, we
will discuss about how, you know, Prabhupada explains the purport. Like I
mentioned earlier, Prabhupada continues the flow of thought, which has started
from the earlier verses in his purports. So, let us look at "dhyāyato viṣayān
puṁsaḥ". So:

        dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ
        saṅgas teṣūpajāyate
        saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ
        kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate

So, now, Prabhupada explains that:

"One who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of the senses."

Conversely, it implies that one who is Krishna Conscious will not be subjected
to material desires. And now, then, Prabhupada gives the example of Lord Shiva
and Haridasa Thakur. And he says, how Lord Shiva was agitated by Pārvatī.
Whereas Haridasa Thakur was not. Now, we may wonder, you know, what does this
mean? Lord Shiva is such a great devata. And how can we say that he is agitated
and Ha..., whether Haridasa Thakur is not agitated. Actually, here, there are
other places where Srila Prabhupada quotes Lord Shiva thus being a dhira. And
he quotes about how, when, even when Pārvatī came and tried to agitate him.
Still, he never got agitated. So, that is the theme of a dhira. So, the point
here is, and there, he says, Pra..., he is, Lord Shiva was absorbed in
meditating on the Supreme Lord. And because he was, you know, meditating on the
Supreme Lord from bhakti-yoga, he was not disturbed. So, here, when Srila
Prabhupada is comparing, it is not a comparison primarily of people. It is more
a comparison of processes, of processes. So, in this particular i..., context,
Prabhupada is talking about the glory of the holy name. So, if one is fixed in
the chanting of the holy names, one is fixed in the process of bhakti-yoga.
Then, the process of bhakti-yoga gives one a higher taste by which one would get
resist the lower taste. Whereas in this particular context, Prabhupada is
talking about Lord Shiva in terms of a yogi. And he is saying, that, and then,
that yogi, as a yogi, that is not necessarily bhakti-yoga. That does not
necessarily give a higher taste. That is equivalent to the taste that one comes
from, gets from bhakti-yoga. And that is why one may fall away. So, the
important principle here is that one does not let oneself get overwhelmed by
material desires. So, bhakti-yoga ensures that one does not get overwhelmed. And
the point of comparison is that, if we, due, that, Lord Shiva, and Lord Brahma,
no doubt, exalted personalities. And those exalted people are respectable,
worshipable in many ways. At the same time, the point here is that just material
position and power are not enough to overcome the, the people of temptations.
One needs the protective grace of the Supreme Lord, which we will get when we
take shelter of the process of devotional service. So, comparing the relative
potency of the two processes of yoga versus bhakti, is the essence of this
example. So, that is why Prabhupada concludes the purport. And he says:

"One who is not, therefore, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however powerful he may be
in controlling the senses by artiﬁcial repression, is sure ultimately to fail,"

Because there is no higher taste.

"for the slightest thought of sense pleasure will agitate him to gratify his
desires."

So, now:

        krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ
        sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ
        smṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo
        buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati

So, "krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ". So, when there is, you know, from anger comes
delusion. From delusion comes loss of memory. So, we discussed this. You know,
i..., irritation, then there delusion. Then, there is oblivion. And then,
"buddhi-nāśāt", "buddhi-nāśāt". "buddhi-nāśo". And "buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati".
From oblivion comes stupefaction. Stupefaction leads to destruction. So, now,
Srila Prabhupada continues this thin..., win of thought, and he says that,
actually, you know, the senses also have to be engaged in Krishna's service. And
he quotes Rūpa Gosvāmī for "phalgu vairāgyaṁ" and "yukta-vairāgyam". So,
"phalgu" means false. So, what is this "phalgu vairāgyaṁ"?

        prāpañcikatayā buddhyā
        hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ
        mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo
        vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate

"phalgu kathyate". Such a "parityāgo" is "phalgu". What is that "phalgu
vairāgyaṁ"? "prāpañcikatayā buddhyā". That "prāpañcika" means mundane. Material.
That "buddhyā". You know, one, by which, one thinks as mundane. You know.
"hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ". Those objects which are connected with Lord Hari.
"mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo". When one thinks them of as they were mun..., mun...,
mundane. And "mumukṣubhiḥ". One who is aspiring for liberation gives them up.
"parityāgo". Such a person is called as "vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate". That
"vairāgyaṁ" is considered "phalgu". It is considered lower class "vairāgyaṁ".
So, you know, point is, that, how does one control the senses? One has to fix
the mind on Krishna. And how do we fix the mind on Krishna? We often have to use
our senses to fix the mind on Krishna. So, therefore, the senses themselves are
to be used. And we can use material things in Krishna's service. Prabhupada's
point here is that how will we be able to avoid "dhyāyato"? Now, we cannot just,
you know, close our eyes and work. When whatever we are doing, we try to,
whatever we are using, we use it in Krishna's service. And that way, we can
avoid "dhyāyato". And then, Prabhupada used the example of how one may, a, a
person, a devotee can take prasad. Whereas a materialistic person, or an
impersonalist, that person who is trying to renounce without engaging the
material in the service of spiritual, can fall back. Because there is no higher
taste available easily. So, now, after this, with this, the answer to the third
question. Third question was "kim āsīta". That is over. So, now, "vrajeta kim".
How does such a person move around? That is talked about here. So, let us look
at that. Hmm. So, now, the other's answer is not discrete. Because in one sense,
in 2.61, also, Krishna said, you know, "yukta". So, "yukta" is connected.
"yukta". So, in that sense, there, he, am..., "yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ". So, that
was a, connected also can be used in the sense of engaged. So, that answer is
flowing into this answer. So, h..., what is the answer now?

        rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu
        viṣayān indriyaiś caran
        ātma-vaśyair vidheyātmā
        prasādam adhigacchati

So, "caran". "caran" means moving about. So, "vrajeta" was the question. And
"caran" is the reference to that point again. "vrajeta" means to move around.
"caran" means to move around. So, what does one do? "viṣayān indriyaiś caran".
So, "indriyaiś" is the senses. They move towards to the sense objects.
"viṣayān". "caran". So, the senses have a ten..., t..., tendency to rush towards
the sense objects. What would we do with that? "ātma-vaśyair". The person brings
them under control. And how does that person do that? "vidheyātmā". By following
the "vidhey"s given in scripture. And for that, what does one have to do? That
is described in the eigtht part of the verse, "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu". For
that, one has to keep one's attachment and aversion under control.

        rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu
        viṣayān indriyaiś caran

And when one does like this:

        ātma-vaśyair vidheyātmā

Then what happens?

        prasādam adhigacchati

Such a person gets prasad. What is the prasad? The prasad is, you know, purity.
The prasad is mercy. The prasad is higher happiness. "adhigacchati". So,
basically, this is talking about how one can get the higher taste. There is a
gradual process over here. What is that gradual process? "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais
tu". Put our, aside our attachment and aversion. There may be certain things
which we may like. Certainly, which we may dislike. But we have to put them
aside so that we can move h..., move towards something better. Because just like
a small child is there, small child does, dislikes studies, and likes playing.
Now, it is not that playing is entirely banned. But the point is, the child has
to learn, like this is how I should work. And there has to be balance. Ok, child
may not like certain subjects to study. But still, the child does that. So, put
asides the situation. And child may like to play a lot. But then, child is told,
ok, now, this is your plate. And then, that is all. So, "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais
tu". So, "rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu". If one puts aside the attachment and
aversion, while following scriptures. Now, scriptures do not absolutely ban all
the things that we like to do. In fact, many of the scrip..., things that
scriptures ban. They are actually harmful for us. So, by giving, d..., giving
them up, we become purified. And we stay our..., keep ourselves out of trouble.
And, of course, we become purified, when we also get a higher taste and we
connect ourselves with Krishna. But by giving them up, itself, further
impurities are stopped. And in that sense, we become, or, we stay a, less impure
than what we would have been otherwise. And when we bring in the pure sound
vibrations, connected with Krishna, that purifies us further. So,
"rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu". So, like that, whatever attachment and aversions are
there, then we put it aside. And then, follow the scripture.

        ... vidheyātmā
        prasādam adhigacchati

Now, it is interesting, Srila Prabhupada uses the word for "prasād...",
"vidheyātmā", you know, for, f..., for the regulative principles of freedom.
Th..., now, generally speaking, we talk about regulation, or discipline, or
restriction as negative. You know, restriction, we think of as deprivation of
freedom. But restriction is not actually deprivation of freedom. Restri..., so,
regulation is not necessarily deprivation. It can very well be protection. You
know, when the mother embraces the child. The child is not in restless. And the
child is asking, why is the mother restricting me? But if the mother embraces
the child, that child, embrace may well be for protection. So, essentially, the
important point is that what is one looking for? So, if we are looking for all
sorts of wanted, godless, sensual enjoyments, then, the scriptural rules and
regulations may seem like a restriction for us. But if we had changed our
values. And we have redirected our desires to be, we have redirected our heart
towards Krishna, then the restrictions serve as protection for us. You know, it
is way, depends on perception. If I want to enjoy in immoral ways and that is
what I think is enjoyment. Then, the rules and regulations act as restrictions.
Why cannot I enjoy? Why are these rules and regulations there? But actually,
when we purify ourselves, and then seek a higher, richer, inner happiness. We
are at the level of the soul. There is pure happiness available. And then, when
we seek that happiness. Then, what happens is, that happiness i..., becomes our
goal. And when that happiness is our goal, then the sensual enjoyment that are
there, they, which are tempting us, that will decide, no, I am not going to
enjoy these things. Then, we just understand that there is actually, not really
deprivation. I do not want those. But they are intruding. Then, I have made
resolve. I will not do this. Then, the rules actually act as protection for me.
So, you know, there may be a, there is a building, say, and there is a fence
around the building. Whether, say, electric wiring all around, so that nobody
can go out. Now, if I am inside. That say, now, I can see that fencing as a
protection. Or I can see it as a deprivation. You know, what, what will it
depend on? It depends on what I consider as important. You know, if the serious
business of my life is inside the house. That means, what I want to do is there.
Everything is there. And there, then I understand that actually, going out would
simply be a destruction for me. Whatever I have to do is inside. My treasure is
inside. My, you know, whatever my, whatever I valued in my life is inside. Then
the fencing is a protection. It is not a deprivation. But if I think that, oh,
everything wonderful is outside the fence. And this fencing is stopping me from
going outside. Then, the same fencing would appear like a deprivation for me.
So, ultimately, what is freedom, it depends on what our goal is. So, if our goal
is material enjoyment. Then, certainly, the rules and regulations of Krishna
Consciousness will appear to be like deprivation. But when we understand that,
actually, my goal is devotional service. And my goal is Krishna prema.
Developing love for Krishna. Then, the fences that are there. You know that
means the rules, regulative principles are there. They act as protection. So,
they do not, I do not anyway want to go there, go outside. But, you know,
sometimes, it is, the mind may just surrender off, and may go in different
directions. But no, I have taken this initiation vow. So, these are regulative
principles that I am going to follow. So, they keep us within a safe zone. So,
that is why regulative principles of freedom mean that they actually free us
from the ever-present distractions which will drag us away from Krishna.

So, we need to see rules not as deprivations, but as protection. Like a mother's
embrace. Another way to understand this is to, the disease metaphor. Which we
have discussed many times. When the doctor tells the patient, do not do certain
things. That may be sounding as a disea..., restriction, but may see..., be seen
as a restriction, or a deprivation. But the point is, the doctor wants the
patient to get healthy. And after getting healthy, the patient will have much
more freedom. You know, right now, the patient is sick. And the patient says, I
want to eat this food. I want to eat that food. And I do not want to take this
bitter of tasty medicines. What happens by that is? Patient cannot get cured.
And when the patient is not cured, then the patient cannot move forward. So,
therefore, the important thing is that if the patient just follows the rules,
and there is freedom. And after that, the patient can do so many things. Whilst
the person, patient is healed. So, same applies with us also in our spiritual
life. Actually, once we develop our love for Krishna, that is the meaning of if
we become spiritually healthy. And there is so much joy available at that time,
in loving Krishna. In serving Krishna. In remembering Krishna. And that is our
goal. So, Prabhupada explains that "prasādam adhigacchati". What is the
"prasādam" over here? Now, generally, we think of the word "prasādam" as the
"prasādam" which we will take with the, honor with the tongue and the mouth.
Yes, that is "prasādam". But the word "prasādam" has a generic meaning. It means
mercy. And what is the mercy over here? The mercy is the higher taste. The mercy
is the "paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate". That was talked about in 2.59. That was "yukta
āsīta mat-paraḥ". Fixing the mind on Krishna. That was talked about in 2.61. So,
h..., actually, when we follow the rules and regulations. Then, fixing the mind
on Krishna becomes easier. We find that, ok, fixing the mind on Krishna is not
so difficult. Why? Because we have become purer now. We have become purer. That
is our goal. Now, after this, Krishna will describe, once we get "prasādam",
then what happens? So, once we see this, then we will understand clearly that
this is not referring to just the prasad that we honor with the tongue. It is
talking about higher taste.

        prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ
        hānir asyopajāyate
        prasanna-cetaso hy āśu
        buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate

"sāde", when one gets "prasādam". "sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir". All miseries go away.
"asyopajāyate". So, all misery goes away for such a person. And then, after
that, what happens? "prasanna-cetaso hy āśu". "prasanna-cetaso". Such a person
becomes joyful. "prasanna-cetaso", becomes, you know, joyful. Now, "āśu". "āśu"
means quickly. "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". And at that time, the intelligence
becomes rock solid. The intelligence becomes unshakable. So, it is interesting
that, before that, you know, Krishna is saying the intelligence is not sh..., is
not so strong. Let us see what this means. So, once we get the "prasādam". Once
we get the higher taste. Once we will become absorbed in the remembrance of
Krishna, then "sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir". That, actually, all misery goes away. How
can all misery go away? The threefold miseries will continue on. This means that
we still have misunderstanding with other. We may still fall sick. And that it
may be too cold. It may be too hot. So, what does it mean "sarva",
"sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir"? Actually, it depends on our consciousness. We may, you
know, there is a joy despite the miseries. The Krishna Conscious joy is so
great. So great. That the miseries become, they are there. But they do not
matter. Because actually, there is so much su..., such, so much, So many better
things available for us in our spiritual life. So, that is how "hānir
asyopajāyate". You know, just like, when we are getting some little food. Say,
man..., we are getting some, if our meal is just one chapati. And that is also
rukes chapati. That is also dried and tasteless. And then, we think, oh, any, it
is ch..., it, it will make us feel bad. We may wonder what. Why this wants such
a simple chapati. But then, if I have many food items. And in that feast, there
is one item which does not taste all that good. There are so many other items
that taste good, that that one item becomes insignificant. So, it is there. But
it does not matter. Because there is so much better food there is available. And
high class food is there. So, like that, you know, when our consciousness at the
material level, if miseries there are at the material level, because our
consciousness is at the material level, so we have e..., nothing else to
experience. It is just like I have only one food to eat. And that food is
miserable, then it is miserable. But then, on the other hand, if I have access
to spiritual happiness. If I develop my relationship with Krishna. And I am
experiencing happiness at the spiritual level. Then, yes, at the material level,
I am experiencing misery. But because what is a..., what I am experiencing at
the spiritual level, so much richer, so much deeper, that, this does not matter.
It is there, but it does not matter. As long as we are in material existence,
the threefold miseries will be there. But they will not matter. Then,
"prasanna-cetaso hy āśu". So, when, like that, we are connected with Krishna,
then we will become "prasanna-cetaso". We will become alwa..., become always
joyful. And then, we are thus joyful. What happens then? "buddhiḥ
paryavatiṣṭhate". At that time, the "buddhiḥ" becomes fixed. So, what does it
mean when Krishna says the "buddhiḥ" becomes fixed so late? Why doesn't
"buddhiḥ" become fixed earlier? Is it not fixed earlier? Actually, it is, but,
at from the time we start hearing scripture, our intelligence becomes strong.
But still, when we ourselves experience the happiness that is being talked about
in spiritual life, then the "buddhiḥ" becomes much stronger. The fixedness of
the "buddhiḥ" becomes much greater. So, how does this happen? It happens because
we are practicing spiritual life. And we have tasted, the experience for, of
happiness for ourselves. So, initially, when we hear from scripture, things seem
logical. Things seem sensible. Things seem intelligible. So, that is good. At
that time, our intelligence becomes little strong. But f..., when that which is
logical becomes experiential. Now, I experience:

        pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ
        su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam

In 9.2, in Bhagavad Gita, Krishna will tell, that, "pratyakṣāvagamaṁ". We
experience directly within. What do we experience? "su-sukhaṁ kartum". This
joyful. That is "rāja-vidyā". That is bhakti, actually. Just like when I go to a
doctor, I have a little faith. Just stop to make worthing, makes sense. But when
I take the medicines and I get cured. Then, ah, yes, what the doctor make...,
says makes perfect sense. I have got cured by it. So, like that, you know, our
intelligence becomes very strong, "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". When we ourselves
experience the "prasādam". And by that, our "hānir" goes a..., "sarva...",
"sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir", all misery goes away. And then, we become
"prasanna-cetaso". Then, we become joyfully situated. So, actually, in the
initial stages of a spiritual life, we cannot just trust our intelligence. We
have to actually expose ourselves to regular scriptural study. Because s...,
scripture is our intelligence. And to the extent we remember scripture, to that
extent we act intelligently. To the extent we forget scripture, to that extent
we act unintelligently. So, that is the difference. Between, so, in our, in our
case, we are talking, intelligence simply means, intelligence simply means the
practice of remembering guru, sadhu, shastra. And acting accordingly. To the
extent we do not remember guru, sadhu, shastra, to that extent, we cannot
act appropriately. And to the extent we do not act appropriately, to that extent
we put ourselves under trouble. We put ourselves to suffering. So, now, let us
move forward and think. If a, if my "buddhiḥ" is established with that stage,
what can I do now? Right now, I can keep hearing. And as I keep hearing, I,
r..., you, by the hearing, I get expe..., get some understanding. That is
the "buddhiḥ". And whatever that experience I have, that reinforces my
"buddhiḥ". So, r..., that, at our stage, hearing is extremely important to stay
steady on the spiritual path. And "buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate". So, intelligence
essentially means the words of guru, sadhu, shastra. We may have material
intelligence in terms of material information processing capacity. There are
many scientists, many scholars, many thinkers who have brilliant information
processing capacity. But often, if we look at their personal lives, now, they
are still, despite their brilliant intellectual capacity, they do not have sense
control. You know, they have so many, you know, they fall prey to lust. Some of
them fall prey to, you know, greed. They have affairs. So, you know, why does it
happen? Because there is a difference between material intelligence and
spiritual intelligence. Material intelligence is the capacity to process
information. And they have that capacity to process information. And by that,
they can come up with some significant insights. They can write books which have
very beautiful poetic metaphors, and literary values. Or they can make scien...,
they can, they make a, s..., inventions and come up with discoveries which
significantly alter the, a progress of technology. But as far as internally
they are concerned, that in and of itself does not lead, guarantee self-s...,
self-control. So, for that, one needs higher taste. And that higher taste is
based on the higher intelligence. So, spiritual intelligence is, the
intelligence that comes from guru, sadhu, shastra. And that intelligence becomes
internalised when we ourselves get the higher taste. So, now, Krishna is
describing how do we do "vrajeta" in this world, "kim vrajeta". We act according
to scripture. We make scriptures our bor..., borders, our, our protection
fences. And then, we move along. Now, Krishna says, while doing this, there is a
danger. 25:27
