Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cx_AITanQlo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_062_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_14_to_19_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=Cx_AITanQlo&event=video_description&redir_token=QN8HanUiK7XedYoiADIB-JaysyB8MTU0ODQ4NzYxNkAxNTQ4NDAxMjE2

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita part of, course of the Bhakti
Shastri part. So, now, we are going to discuss the third chapter. In the last
class, we discussed about how the Vedic understanding of the universe being
controlled by conscious beings, the devatas, is not contradictory to the
scientific understanding of the universe operating according to mechanisms.
Mechanisms and persons are not contradictory, but complementary. So, you know, I
would like to conclude that section by giving you one more additional example to
illustrate how both of them can be complementary. Let us look at the verse
today. And then, we move forward to that section. Yes.

        annād bhavanti bhūtāni
        parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ
        yajñād bhavati parjanyo
        yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ

So, "annād bhavanti bhūtāni". All living beings subsist on grains. And where do
grains come from? The word "annāt" can be used generically for all food. Or it
can be used specifically for grains. Both are valid uses. "parjanyād
anna-sambhavaḥ". So, rains come, a, so, grains come from rains. So, "parjanyāt".
"parjanyāt" was also the name of the father of Nanda Maharaja. "parjanyād
anna-sambhavaḥ". So, they are, they were dependent on cows. Cows needed grass.
So, in that sense, the names related with nature are natural in such settings.

        parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ
        yajñād bhavati parjanyo

So, where do, you know, where does grains come from? Where do grains come,
grains come from? Yajña. And "yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ". Yajña comes from karma.
This and the next verse are related. So, we will discuss both together. Let us
s..., look at the next verse, also.

        karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi
        brahmākṣara-samudbhavam
        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

So, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, he..., the ka..., where do, which karma
comes from? Karma is prescribed in the Vedas. So, here, the word "brahma" refers
to Vedas. "brahma". The word "brahma" can have many meanings. So, in 3.15, here,
it refers to the Vedas. So, "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam". So, "akṣara". refers to
the Supreme Lord. The Lord is infallible. That Lord never falls. That Lord never
deteriorates. So, "akṣara". So, the "br...", the Vedas come from the Absolute
Truth, "akṣara", "ak...", "tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma". Therefore, that
all-pervading brahma. "nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam" is always situated in Yajña.
So, now, this last part is something interesting which I will come to. But let
us look at the cyclic sequence which preceeds that. So, we are currently looking
at the second section of the Bhagavad Gita. First section was kar..., Kali, a,
karma-yoga is better for you as you are not qualified for jnana-yoga. Second
section was if you are not qualified even for karma-yoga. Then, practice
karma-kanda. So, we are di..., discussing this section. So, let us look here
now. The cycle of sacrifice. So, looking back at the two verses which we have
just discussed. So, "annād bhavanti bhūtāni". So, "bhūtāni" is here. How do the
li..., the, where, where do the living entities get the substance from? From
"annāt". And then, "parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ". Rains produce grains. "yajñād",
"yajñād bhavati parjanyo". Yajña produces, you know, rains. And then, "karma".
"brahma". Then, "yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ". That Yajña comes from karma. We will
discuss this cosmic connection a little later. But just let by cycle. "karma
brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi" means that karma is
"jn...", a, told to us in Vedas. So, now, you know, the, Krishna does not
complete the cycle over here. But in the next verse, He uses the word "evaṁ
pravartitaṁ cakraṁ". "cakraṁ". So, the "cakraṁ" is completed when the living
entities come to know about Vedas and live according to the Vedas. So, the cycle
which Krishna describes is still over here. But the, how it gets concluded, when
the living entities learn to live according to Vedas, do their karma, and
perform Yajña. So, yesterday, we discussed about this point here, how Yajña
produces r..., r..., rains. Now, to understand this further, how the mechanistic
explanation, mechanist explanation and the personalist explanation are not
contradictory, but complementary. The mechanist means, mechanist, there is
mechanist means, mechanical based on mechanics. So, there is mechanist
explanation. And there is personalist explanation. Personalist means there are
person being, persons who are in charge. So, let us consider a billiards board.
A, in billiards, there is a long rectangular table with holes at various
corners. And the, there is a long stick which the players use. And they are
meant to hit the balls with the sticks. And the goal of the game is that the
balls should go into the holes. Now, if somebody had a top view of the came...,
of the billiards board using a camera. Then, within the billiards board, one
will practically never see the players. All that one will see is the sticks.
Tuck. The stick is moving forward. The stick is hitting this bunch of balls. And
this goal, balls are moving in this direction. That ball goes into the hole. The
stick hits this ball. That ball hits that ball. And that ball sends that ball
into the hole. Like that. So, th..., if we just looked at the billiards boards
itself. All that we would see is the interaction of sticks and balls.

Now, if we apply the scientific, you know, a, mode of analysis to this. You
know, the moment of all the balls along the surface of the billiards board, will
be according to the laws of mechanics. So, if a particular ball goes into a
whole when a stick hits it. Then, we can find out, oh, this stick must have,
this stick hit it this force, at this angle and that is why this ball went into
the hole. So, as far as the laws of mechanics are concerned, they are valid. At
the same time, you know, the laws of mechanics offer a correct, but not complete
explanation. Why correct, but not complete? Because the balls are going into the
holes, not just because, you know, the, they are being hit at a particular
force, hit with a particular force by the players. That is there. The particular
quantity of the force is there. But why are the players hitting at that force
with that angle? That is because they have particular training. They have
particular expertise. And they have particular desires. Ok, I want that ball to
go into the hole. So, if I hit this ball like this, it will grace that ball and
that will go into the hole. Like that. So, the point is that there are, there
are mecha..., there is, the mechanist explanation is correct. That yes,
according to certain laws of mechanics, the balls will go into the holes when
they hit in particular way. But along with the mechanist explanation, there is
the personalist explanation, also. The personalist explanation is that there are
persons with skills and desires who are playing the billiards game. And they are
hitting the balls, and, with the sticks in particular angles. And that is why
they are, the balls are going into the holes. So, both these explanations are
complementary. They are not contradictory. Now, similarly, rains falling because
of particular mechanisms. Say, the water getting evaporated. And the water
condensing through the medium of the clouds at the appropriate change of pivoty.
That mechanism is correct, but it is not complete. So, the mechanist and co...,
personalist explanations do not have to be contradictory. They can also be
complementary. Now, so, "yajñād". "yajñād bhavati parjanyo". Going back to this
chart. "yajñād bhavati parjanyo" Now before that, that is what. "yajñaḥ
karma-samudbhavaḥ". What does, "yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ" means that, you know,
the karma is not just our worldly obligations. And, a, actually, our, it is our,
k..., part of our karma is to do Yajña. In, you know, today's society, many
think that it is their duty to take care of their family members. To take care
of themselves. To do duty, d..., do this to, you know, their relatives. And they
think, this is, this is what is our duty. This is what God has told us to do.
This is what we will do. Yes, that is definitely true. That we sh..., that we
have to do. But that does not come, that is not the complete scope of our
duties. Actually, the taking care of the, you know, you know, l..., du..., the,
one's children, say, is something which even animals do. You know, taking care
of family members is something which even animals do in many ways. So, you know,
the birds take care of their babies. So, th..., you know, that, and that alone
does not complete the scope of human duties. You know, human duties involve
rising to a higher level. Where we take care, not just of others' bodies. But
take care of others' souls, also. And when, also, when we take care, not just of
our bodies, but our own souls, also. If we are just taking, our, care of the
bodies, or our own bodies and the bodies of our loved ones. Then, we are doing
our duties. But we are not doing our complete duties.

So, Srila Prabhupada explains that, you know, f..., a mother's, or a parent's
love for his children is natural and necessary. But it is not spiritual. It is
natural and necessary. What is the meaning of natural, necessary? Natural means
when a couple, they unite and give birth to a child, by the arrangement of
material nature, they, you know, develop affection for that child. So, by the
arrangement of nature, their affection is created. It is natural. And it is
necessary. Necessary means that such affection actually enables us to, you know,
live in this world. In many tim..., in many species when the, you know, young
ones are born. At that time, they need the care of their parents. Without that,
they will not be able to grow. So, that is necessary. So, by the arrangement of
nature, what is necessary is also arranged for through the feelings for
affec..., affection that are there. So, this is in no ways meant to minimise the
sacrifice that the parents do for the children. That is definitely true. That
they do sacrifice and that is laudable. At the same time, that does not make it
spiritual. Spiritual is that which is connected with the soul. Or, you know, you
know, as researchers have studied nature, you know, the study of the natural
behavior of animals of living beings in the natural habitats is called as
ethology. So, ethologists have found that a..., animals behave in fascinating
ways. For example, as we were bird, and this bird, when, you know, it unites
with the she-bird. And then, they will, the bird becomes pregnant. She-bird
becomes preg..., and then, they both search around and find some good hollow in
a tree. And then, they put the, a, bi..., the female lays the eggs, and puts
them. And then, they cover the eggs. And they keep, a, they, they cover the
eggs. They cover the hollow in the hole itself with some proper covering, mud,
and you know, some brem..., branches, and brambles. So that no snakes appear to
just can go inside and eat the eggs. And then, after that, the she-bird keeps
coming and wo..., looking at them. And when the eggs are to be, hide, she comes
and stays inside with the birdlets, with the eggs. And the he-bird cops and
keeps giving a food to the she-bird. And then, as the birdlets, you know, eggs
hash and the birdlets come out. Then, the he-bird has to get more and more food.
Because now, food is needed not just for the mo..., for the she-bird. But it is
also needed for the birdlets. And when the he-bird gives food. The she-bird
first gives foods to the birdlets. And then, takes herself. And then, after
that, when, you know, the birdlets start becoming bigger and bigger, and they
need more food, then the bird comes and tells his she-birdlet. It is too much
now. I cannot do it. You also have to take a job. Come out now. So, then, we,
they will become double when they become couples. You know, the, the she-bird
also comes out. And then, they c..., cover up the hole in the tree, you know,
keeping only a small out, opening so that they can drop food. And then, what do
the she-bird and he-bird? They go out and search for food. And now inside, some
eggs have hashed earlier. Some h..., eggs have hashed later. So, the eggs that
have hashed earlier, those birdlets are bigger. The other birdlets are smaller.
So, naturally, when the parent birds come and drop food into the hollow, the
bigger birdlets are able to catch it. When the bigger birdlets catch it, they do
not devour the food themselves. They first give it to the small birdlets. And
then, later on when the small birdlets are fed, then they take the food
themselves.

So, we see this affection among family members, there in nature, also. At one
level, we can say it is so touching and moving. That there is a spirit of
sacrifice even in animals, lowest species. So, and if it is not there in human
specy, that is so unfortunate. That, but another level is that if we live only
at that level, then we are actually not practicing spiritual life. We are not
actually living at a human level. Because hu..., privilege of human life is to
explore and relish our spiritual avenue. So, therefore, karma is not just taking
care of our family members. You know, a, so, our duty is, are not just taking
care of our family members. It is important. We have to do that. But we also
have to connect with God. So, that ho..., we discussed about our horizontal
relationship and vertical relationships. You know, only in human form can we
pursue the vertical relationship with Krishna. So, it is a special privilege.
And the performance of Yajña essentially is the opportunity to, is a means by
which we can pursue the vertical relationship. So, Yaj..., when we perform
Yajña, then Yajña enables us to acknowledge the higher authorities centering
ultimately on the Supreme Being, Krishna. So, therefore, "karma", "yajñaḥ
karma-samudbhavaḥ". So, "samudbhavaḥ" means bor..., o..., born along with that.
You know, concomitant with that. So, along with karma, is Yajña included. So, we
should not think that, you know, when we go to a temple. Or we chant some holy
names. We are doing some favor to God. You know. Actually, I do not have to do
it. But just to be a good person, I am doing it. It is a part of our, you know,
our duty as human beings to take care of our material as well as our spiritual
side. So, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". That is why from where do we know, come
to know about akarma? The, we come to know about akarma from shastra. Therefore,
it is said "brahmākṣara-samudbha...". "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, we move
back "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". So, karma comes from the Vedas. Karma comes,
kar..., the, the, when we want to know about akarma, we cannot know it by our
speculative efforts. We have to seek the scriptural wisdom to know about what
are the, you know, what are the duties that we are expected to perform. Now, in
this whole cycle, actually, the Lord is the source of everything. Specifically,
you know, th..., ultimately, the Lord is source of all living beings. The Lord
is the source of nature. The Lord is source of the Yajñic rituals. The Lord is
source of the scriptures. But specifically, the Lord is not visible to us. The
Lord is not directly visible to us. Because the Lor..., Krishna, the Supreme
Lord is spiritual. Whereas we ar..., are currently at the material level of
consciousness. So, therefore, the spiritual realm and the material realm, what
is the connecting link? That is the scripture. You know, the, the spiritual
realm becomes accessible to us at the material realm through scriptural wisdom.
And the scriptural wisdom is not just theoretical. It is transformational. It
gives us, you know, practical processes of yoga, by which we can raise
ourselves, transform ourselves to rise from the material level to the spiritual
level. So, that is why, although Krishna is the source of everything. In this
context, it is said that "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam". That the "brahma", the
scriptures come from the Supreme Lord. "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam".

So, why scriptural wisdom? The Lord becomes manifested. So, the, now, let us
look at the last line on this verse. We said we will come back to it.

        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

So, "sarva-gataṁ brahma" means that brahma is present everywhere. The Absolute
Truth is there everywhere. "sarva-gataṁ brahma". But how do we come to know
about that brahma? "nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam". He is always, you know,
accessible to us through Yajña. "nityaṁ yajñe". So, that means, the human
beings, they can access the Absolute Truth through the performance of Yajña. Let
us look back at the cycle once again. So, here, we see that Krishna, the akṣara
is the source and goal of everything. But how will He be accessible to us? He is
not visible to us. So, He has given the Vedas. And in the Vedas, our prescribed
duties are given. And the prescribed duties that connect us with Kr..., Krishna,
with Him is Yajña. So, therefore, by the means of Yajña, we become connected
with the Absolute Truth. "tasmāt".

        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

So, Yajña makes the, a, makes the universal accessible to us. That the Absolute
Truth is "sarva-gataṁ", is universal. But the universal becomes accessible to
us through Yajña. Now, when we understand this point, we recognise the
importance of Yajña. Oh, the Lord is there everywhere. But how do we perceive
Him? So, Yajña offers us the means to perceive Him. So, what this essentially
Yajña involve? We discussed Yajña essentially involves sacrifice. When we
perform sacrifice for the pleasure of the Absolute. We give up what we can,
could have used for our pleasure for His pleasure. And in this way, we connect
with the Absolute Truth. So, Yajña makes the universal accessible to us. And
therefore:

        tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma
        nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

The, always, that are, c..., all-pervading Absolute i..., become..., is
accessible to us as Yajña. So, after we understand this cycle. So, we
participate in the cycle through Yajña. And when we participate in the cycle,
through, by doing Yajña, then the cycle continues. Then, we get grains. And that
is how we are able to survive. So, just like, what do we mean by cycle? You
know, the government gives water supply. And the government tells the citizens
rules to follow. When we follow the rules, and we pay the taxes. So, from the
government, the water is coming to us. And from us, taxes are going to the
government. And when this goes on cycle. Now, if we stop paying the taxes. Then,
what happens? The government stop giving water. So, there is, for the cycle to
go on, we have to do, keep doing Yajña. We have to keep paying taxes. Similarly,
the devatas are providing us necessities. And when we do the "Yajña"s, then the
cycle keeps going on. So, the, looking at, so that means, now, this is a, a, we
will look back at the cycle. First, let us understand this simple cycle. You
know, there are, there is the higher universal government. Which involves
devatas, you know, are, who are headed by the Supreme Lord. This is Vedic
government. And we are the citizens. Especially human beings are expected to, a,
co..., abide by the laws of God. You know, animals, they do not abide by the
laws of the state. You know, if there is a red signal. And then, a donkey is
going around the signal. The donkey will just walk through the signal. And there
is a young person on a motorcycle. You know. And that person sees, oh, I also
go. Waits the red signal. Red signal, zzz, goes through it. And then,
immediately, the police man will blow the whistle. And stop. Stop. Stop. And
then, he may give him the ticket. He may give the ticket to him as a fine. He
says, you know, but the donkey was walking through. You did not fi..., fine him.
Why are you fining me? He says, because you are a bigger donkey. Phew. The
donkey is not expected to follow rules. We are expected to follow rules. So,
actually, the point here is that the donkey does not have the higher
intelligence. We human beings have the higher intelligence. So, we are expected
to perform Yajña. And thereby, we will get the necessities that we are ordained
to get. That we are expe..., a, that we are, not ordained, that we need for our
living. And the cosmic arrangement gives us. If we maintain the cycle. So, now,
how is this sim..., this simple cycle which Krishna has talked about, devatas
satisfying us, and we satisfying the devatas? How is this related with this
particular cycle, more complex cycle which we see over here? Actually, it is a,
it is, same continuation, essentially. But we come to know, the way, we
practically implement the cycle is, the role of the devatas is in ensuring that
"parjanyāt" is provided. And for us, for us living beings, we need food. So, in
a sense, we could say that, this part, "parjanyāt", this refers to how the
origin may come. That is the devatas. And the whole remaining part, from
"bhūtāni" to Yajña. From "bhūtāni", Vedas, karma, and Yajña, this is our part.
So, when we do these three things. We understanding the Vedas, understand our
karma and do the Yajña within that. Then, we are cooperating. And the devatas,
what do they do? They are in charge of the rains. And they give the rains by
which we get grains. So, in this way, the cycle is maintained. Now, Krishna
tells in the next verse what happens if one does not maintain that cycle. Before
we go into that, let us look at Srila Prabhupada's purport quickly.

So, Prabhupada quotes, Prabhupada's essential point here is that the devatas are
not the supreme. The Supreme Lord is supreme. And devatas are just parts. So, he
quotes from Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa about how Supreme Lord is yajña-puruṣa. And
everybody is benefited by Him. You know, everybody is, He is the Supreme
Beneficiary. He is the Lord of the devatas. So, then, Prabhupada says how when
we take prasad, then we pro..., protect ourselves from the vacci..., from the
infection by material nature. See, prasadam is like a vaccine. So, He says one
who does not do so. That means one who does not take prasad:

"continues to increase the volume of sinful action, and this prepares the next
body to resemble hogs and dogs , to suffer the resultant reactions of all sins."

And then, "karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi". Prabhupada quotes in this purport o...,
from the, Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad. It is a famous verse. He says how the, you
know, the scriptures come from the Lord. So, here, Prabhupada is quoting for
this point. "brahmākṣara-samudbhavam". So, the brahmana, the scriptures come
from the Absolute Truth. So, how do we understand this? He is quoting from the
this:

        asya mahato bhūtasya niśvasitam etad yad ṛg-vedo yajur-vedaḥ sāma-vedo ’tharvāṅgirasaḥ.

So, "asya mahato bhūtasya niśvasitam". So, from the breathing of the great
Personality of Godhead. "mahato bhūtasya niśvasitam". "niśvasitam" means
breathing. You know. So, from His breathing, the, you know, the Yu..., the Vedas
come out. So, that means, now, Prabhupada quotes over "Brahma-saṁhitā" how is,
the Lord can do anything. You know, With any of His senses, He can do any of the
activities. So, even by His breathing, sound can come out. Now, Krishna will
tell about what will happen if we do not follow this cosmic cycle.

        evaṁ pravartitaṁ cakraṁ
        nānuvartayatīha yaḥ
        aghāyur indriyārāmo
        moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

So, "evaṁ pravartitaṁ". "pravartitaṁ" means that which is established. So, the
cycle, the "cakraṁ", that is established by the Vedas. "nānuvartayatīha yaḥ".
"anuvartaya", "anuvartayati" means that which is followed, adopted. "na",
"anuvartayati" means not followed. "yaḥ". That person. That person is "aghāyur".
That person's life is filled with "agha". "agha" means sin. "indriyārāmo". And
what is that person doing? You know, he is trying to delight in the senses.
"indriyārāmo". And what happens to like, such a person? "moghaṁ pārtha sa
jīvati". So, "mogham" is waste. The word "mogham" will come again in the
Bhagavad Gita. On several occasions. Most famously, it comes in 9.12. Waste. So,
"moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati". Such a person's whole life goes in vain. So, one does
so, follow cycle. Such a person, that person's life is filled with sin. Lives
for sense gratification. Lives in vain. Now, you know, people generally have a
definition of sin, that is relative. So, for example, you know, there is sin.
And there is crime. So, crime is that which is considered to be legally wrong.
And sin is that which is considered to be religiously wrong, a, morally wrong.
So, you know, when the scriptures are the govern..., governing laws for, are
the governing guide books for the state, then crime and sin will be the same.
Because the government will act according to the scriptures. But when the
government is not acting according to scriptures, then crime and sin need not be
the same. And when the crime and sin are not the same, then often that which is
a sin, may not be considered to be a crime at all. For example, today, in most
countries, abortion has been legalised. So, abortion is actually nothing, but
cold-blooded murder. And the tragedy is that, you know, there is a systematic
program of disinformation. Disinformation means giving, not giving proper
information by which people do not come to know that the abor..., a, there is a
whole process of abortion which involves killing of a child. So, many times,
when the, when the prospective abortion, those who want to abort, they are
shown a, pictures, 29:07
