Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yNOEUpGZIMA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=psA5oxRcJ-y-3JmPT5n4GaGbMVx8MTU0ODQ4NzEwOEAxNTQ4NDAwNzA4&v=yNOEUpGZIMA&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_047_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_01_Text_37_to_46_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome. So, we will be discussin the B..., last part of the
Bhagavad Gita's first chapter, starting from 1.37. And we will go till 1.46
today. So, let us look at the sections of the Bhagavad Gita. Here, we will see.
Bhagavad Gita has two parts. Observing the armies, Sanyan Vikshan Yoga. 1 to 26.
And Arjuna Vishada Yoga is 27 to 46, Arjuna's lamentation. And in this, we have,
the first reason was compassion, which we discussed. Then after that, the next
reason is enjoyment. So, compassion was, Arjuna is feeling, how can my, how, how
can I let my "sva-janaṁ" die? They are all going to die. And they are all my
relatives. Then, the next is, then, enjoyment is what will be the enjoyment for
me if m..., those with whom I would want to enjoy, they are all dead. And then,
36 is:

        pāpam evāśrayed asmān

That is we discussed, started discussing of, with sinful reactions. These are
"ātatāyinaḥ". They are aggressors. But they are also relatives. And it is my
duty to protect my relatives. That is the reason we discussed. And then 39 to 43
is destruction of family traditions. And after that, 44, 45, 46, last three are
more or less, he is saying that I cannot fight. That is the conclusion of the
chapter. So, let us look at 36 onwards now. So, we will see that:

        yady apy ete na paśyanti
        lobhopahata-cetasaḥ

"yady apy ete na paśyanti", Arjuna is speaking over here in 37th verse.

        yady apy ete na paśyanti
        lobhopahata-cetasaḥ
        kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ
        mitra-drohe ca pātakam

        kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ
        pāpād asmān nivartitum
        kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ
        prapaśyadbhir janārdana

So, this is the only verse in the Bhagavad Gita, a set of verses where the same
line is repeated in successive verses. So, there are four parts. So, twenty...,
37C and 37D are the same. 37C is "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". And 37D is also
"kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". And there are other sections also in the Bhagavad Gita
where parts of the verse, verses are repeated. For example, most famous example
9.34 and 18.65. 9.34 is:

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
        mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam
        ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ

So, actually, two point five parts of the verses are the same. In 18.65:

        man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
        mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
        mām evaiṣyasi ...

Till here, two point five part of the verses are same. And then, after that, two,
two, two point five out of four, it is, it is more than in, you know, sixt...,
or more than sixty-two percent of the verses are, is the same.

        mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te
        pratijāne priyo ’si me

So, "pratijāne priyo ’si me". Actually, what is being described here is that the
verses are the same, but import is more on, in 9.44 is, emphasize more on the
devotee staying committed to practice of devotional service. And in 18.65, the
emphasize is more on Krishna expressing His affection for the devotee. And
reassuring that the devotee will surely be protected. So, now, in this case,
Arjuna is contrasting to people. The same line is used because he is contrasting
to st..., s..., kinds of thought. And their perception of the same event. So,
the event is "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". So, "kula-kṣaya", the destruction of
"kula", destruction of dynasty. "kṛtaṁ", those who do it. "doṣaṁ", they are
faulty. In fact, the destroying one's dynasty itself is a fault. Now, there are
two different people, the Kauravas and the Pandavas who are going to perceiving
this differently. So, Arjuna might be sensing that there is a possible
anticipation to his o..., o..., objection to his argument. So, we will get sin
if we kill these aggressors. Then, thereafter, if you do not kill them, they
will kill you. And that is what they have been trying to do for so long. Arjuna
is also acknowleding that when in the previous verse, he said, "ātatāyinaḥ".
They are aggressors. So, if they are getting k..., they are getting ki..., they
are going to kill. Then, what to do? "yady apy ete na paśyanti". So, he is
saying that they are actually blinded. Because they are blinded. "yady apy ete
na paśyanti". "ete", these people. Even if they are not able to see "paśyanti".
What are not, what, why are they not able to see? "lobhopahata-cetasaḥ". So,
"lobha" is greed. "upahata" means abducted away. "cetasaḥ", their
consciousness is abducted away by greed. So, Duryodhana is blinded by greed. And
he is not thinking of transgressing the "kula-dharmāḥ". He is meant to protect
his relatives. But he is out here to destroy his relatives.

        lobhopahata-cetasaḥ
        kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

So, "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". That the "doṣaṁ", the fault of killing one's
relatives, "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ". What, "mitra-drohe ca pātakam". And what is the
cause of this? Actually, this is all resulted from quarrel, friendly quarrels,
actually. You know, Duryodhana, the Kauravas and Pandavas grew up as cousins. Of
course, they gr..., they did not, they did not born as babies together. They
were together for some time, you know, only after they had grown up a little
bit. So, Duryodhana actually, there is a background to Duryodhana's infatuation
with the kingdom and he is being a spoiled child. Pan..., because Dhṛtarāṣṭra
was blind. So, Dhṛtarāṣṭra did not become the king. Pandu became the king. Pandu
went around and conquered the world, got a lot of treasure. But then his mind
shifted. He felt no longer any charm in world..., in the role of a king. So, he
said that I want to go to the forest, to the foothills of the Himalaya. Then,
stay there in ascetic way of life. So, his wives felt they could not live
without him. So, both Kuntī and Madri said that we will also come with you. So,
then both of them went with him. And at that time, Pandu made Dhṛtarāṣṭra the
king. You know, not exactly the king, but the in-charge, like regent. So, now,
when he was the king over there, acting king, so, at that time, he got attached
to the kingdom. He had more or less reconciled to the faith that he would never
officially be the king. But he was getting the honor of the king. And then as
Pandu was living in the forest. At that time, Pandu had no attach..., no, no
attachment to the kingdom. But then he felt that I have responsibility. I have
to am..., make sure that the dynasty goes on. And I have to beget children. And
then, there is a long story. But eventually, the Pandavas were born. And then
later on, after the birth of the Pandavas. This will, the Pandavas were staying
in the forest only. And Duryodhana, along with his 99 brothers, were born. And
they were staying in the palace here. So, now, because Pandu had left the wo...,
left more or less. And there was no indication that he had given that he was
coming back. So, everybody in the palace thought that Duryodhana was going to
going..., become the next king. And because he was like, he was like the
prince who was going to become the king, he was, he was pampered and spoiled.
And he got every single desire of his fulfilled. And he became very proud,
arrogant, and very demanding because of becoming a spoiled child. And although,
Bhishma saw the faults in him. But he felt that he will grow, outgrow those
faults. So, he is, the child is going to become the king. So, they indulged him,
quite a bit. However, when the Pandavas came back. So, because of an unexpected
misfortune, Pandu passed away. And then, Madri went in, went with him in the
funeral fire, in sati. And then, Kuntī came back. Now, when Kuntī and the
Pandavas came back, then, you know, they were welcome back. Of course, it, they
were, everybody was grief struck. But they were, after the g..., morning period
was over, then they all welcomed the Pandavas. And they found that the behavior
of Yudhiṣṭhira in particular, and the Pandavas in general, was a, was a very
pleasant contrast to the behavior of Duryodhana in particular, and the Kauravas
in general. You know, the Kauravas were haughty. While the Pandavas were gentle.
The Kauravas were insensitive. The Pandavas were very sensitive. The Kauravas
were demanding. The Pandavas were accommodating. The Kauravas were, would care
only for themselves. The Pandavas would care for others. And the Kauravas were
ungodly. The Pandavas were godly.

So, because of this contrast, soon, the Pandavas became en..., became endear to
the citizens, the courtiers, and Bhishma Pitamah also. Everyone fell almost in
love with the Pandavas. And as this progressed, Duryodhana has started resenting
at. He said I was the center of attention. So, Duryodhana realised that not only
he have, was he no longer the center of attention. But even his future claim as
the king was threatened. So, he felt as if the Pandavas had usurped his claim to
the kingdom. He had expected to become the king. But now the Pandavas had come
back. And because Yudhiṣṭhira had been born earlier than Duryodhana. So,
Yudhiṣṭhira's claim was there. And anyway, Yu..., Pandu was being the king. So,
his son would normally have become the king. But even if there had been some
conflict because Dhṛtarāṣṭra was the older brother. But among the generation
ration, Yudhiṣṭhira was older. So, from that time onward, Duryodhana nursed
envy and greed in his heart. And because of that, he felt practically no
affection for the Pandavas. He felt only anger, only envy. And he wanted the
kingdom at all cost.

So, "lobhopahata-cetasaḥ". You know, actually, although the Kaurava..., Pandavas
were the brothers of the Kauravas, cousins. But Duryodhana never saw them as
brothers. He saw them as enemies. Enemies whose downfall, humiliation, and
destruction became the goal of his life. And he was living in this way, he did
conspiracy after conspiracy. And finally now, there is a final confrontation.
So, co..., the, Arjuna is thinking that Duryodhana has been blinded. And his
brothers also similarly are blinded. But, although they are not able to see,
"mitra-drohe ca pātakam". Actually, they were cousin..., they were friends. They
were cousins. Childhood, they could have gone as friend. But "mitra-drohe ca
pātakam". Quarrel, and their quarrel had grown, grown, grown, grown. And it had
become intorable.

        kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ
        pāpād asmān nivartitum

So, he says, they are blinded. They are blinded. "lobhopahata-cetasaḥ". But
"lo...", "jñeyam asmābhiḥ". we know by "asmābhiḥ" is us. We are "jñeyam", we
know. So, when we know that "pāpād asmān nivartitum". So, when we know, "ku...",
the "ku...", "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". We know the fault of destroying our
dynasty. We are able to see. "prapaśyadbhir". So, there is a contrast between
"opahata-cetasaḥ" and "prapaśyadbhir". "opahata-cetasaḥ" is in 37B. And there,
he is saying that, they are, they are con..., they are not able to see. "ete na
paśyanti". So, there is "na paśyanti" there. And here, there is "prapaśyadbhir".
So, "paśyad", the same word is there. They are not able to see. But we can see.
So, when we can see, how, "kathaṁ", "pāpād asmān nivartitum". How can we engage
in the sinful activity? We can see. And because we can see, we must not engage
in this perc..., sinful activity. So, Arjuna is taking the high moral ground
over here. And he is saying that even if it is true that the Kauravas have, are
blinded by greed, we are not blinded. And even if they do wrong, we should not
wrong. So, we should, we should see. "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ". And not act
accordingly. No matter, Arjuna is thinking that, yes, you know, because we will
get "pāpād asmān". We can see this is "pāp". And because we can see this "pāp",
we will get the reactions more. And they are doing "pāp". But they cannot s...,
they are blinded. So, they cannot see this "pāp". They will also get the
reactions. But when we can see that the reactions are coming, why should we do
it? Now, as he is thinking about "kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ", at the fault of
destroying the dynasty. And the thought comes in mind. He starts thinking, not
just in terms of the next life. What is going to happen to them when they get
the sinful reactions? He starts thinking what will happen to the dynasty itself,
after, after this generation? What will happen to the successive generations? He
starts thinking that there will be chaos over there also. So, his thought is
now, is four-fold. First, he thinks, first thing, compassion. Oh, why should my
relatives die? Then, second question says that, why, if my relatives die, how
will I enjoy? And he starts thinking. Ok, now, this is, that, the, so, now, this
is in this lifetime. Or this is in the present, or in the near future, near
future. That, ok, we will all die. Why should they die? They, I love them. How
can I kill them? How can I be the cause of them dying? Then, if they die, how
will I enjoy? That is also in the near future. Now, after that, he is thinking
about a slightly more distant future. Or, of their next life. He says, we will
get the "pāp". We will do the "pāp" and get the reactions. How will we deal with
this? And now, he starts thinking, apart from us, what is the legacy that we
will leave? What will happen to our dynasty? And he talks about it in the next
verse. So, now, he talks about what will happen in this dy..., our life after
the dynasty is destroyed.

        kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti
        kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ
        dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam
        adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

So, "kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti". So, when the "kula-k...", "kula", when the dynasty
is destroyed.

        ... praṇaśyanti
        kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ
        
So, along with that, what will happen? The "kula-dharmāḥ" will be destroyed.
"sanātanāḥ". "praṇaśyanti". So, "kula-kṣaye" is the destruction of family. And
then "kula-dharmāḥ" means every dynasty has its own duties, their "dharmāḥ". And
that will also be destroyed. Now, here, there is a, there is a sort of
antithesis or contrast over here. He is using the word "praṇaśyanti", which
refers to destruction. And "sanātanāḥ", that which is eternal. So, how can that
which is eternal be destroyed? So, actually, that, that which is eternal cannot
be destroyed. And that which is destroyed is not eternal. So, here, Arjuna is
overcome by illusion. And he is thinking that the "kula-dharmāḥ" is "sanātanāḥ"
"dharmāḥ". The "kula-dharmāḥ" is not "sanātanāḥ" for the atma. It is only the
bhakti, the seva "dharmāḥ", the bhakti "dharmāḥ" that is "sanātanāḥ". So, in
that sense, that is, actually, "kula-dharmāḥ" is not "sanātanāḥ". But at the
same time, "kula-dharmāḥ" is important. Because the, in the Vedic culture, there
are two levels of "dharmāḥ". There is apara "dharmāḥ". And there is para
"dharmāḥ". apara "dharmāḥ" is subordinate religion, lower religion. Para
"dharmāḥ" is superior religion, supreme religion. So, apara "dharmāḥ" is also
important. You know, the, for the spouses, to be faithful to each other. For the
parents, to take care of the children. For the children, to care for their
elderly parents. For people, for relatives, to care for each other. This is also
"dharmāḥ", this "kula-dharmāḥ". One has to do this. Because that is also a part
of our, not just familial duties, but it is also part of our apara "dharmāḥ"
level of duty. So, "kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ". It is not "sanātanāḥ" in the sense
that it is not the eternal nature of the soul. But some kind of obligation has
to be there in life. Some kind of dutifulness has to be there in, in society,
for society to, to go on. So, when people's lives are destructed, what will
happen? 

        dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam
        adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

So, when the "kula-dharmāḥ" is destroyed. So, "kula-dharmāḥ" is important. And
there has to be some kind of "kula-dharmāḥ" in society. So, in that sense, it is
also eternal. Eternal sense, as long as creation is there. Some kind of
"kula-dharmāḥ" is there. Now, that may be according to scripture. That may not
be according scripture. That is different. But when "dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ
kṛtsnam", when that "dharme", which is according to scripture, which was there
at the time of Pandavas:

        ... naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam
        adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

Then, "adharmaḥ" will raise. So, actually, in the world, "dharmaḥ" and
"adharmaḥ" are always in a conflict. "dharmaḥ" and "adharmaḥ" are always in a
conflict. And "dharmaḥ" is always under attack from "adharmaḥ". And if "dharmaḥ"
becomes weak. If "dharmaḥ" is destroyed. And immediately "adharmaḥ" will take
over. This happens in our heart. This happens in society. This happens all over
the world. Not just all over the world, it happens all over the universe. Not
just all over the universe, it happens all over all the universes. There is
always a battle between "dharmaḥ" and "adharmaḥ". So, now, "adharmo ’bhibhavaty
uta", "adharmaḥ" will become predominant. Now, for us, "dharmaḥ" and "adharmaḥ"
may just be concepts. Now, ok, what is the social consequences? What is the,
what will happen if "adharmaḥ" becomes predominant? Then, he describes in the
next:

        adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa
        praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ
        strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya
        jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

So, "adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa", when there is no dharma, then "praduṣyanti
kula-striyaḥ" that the "striyaḥ", the women who are in the "kula", they will be
"praduṣyanti". They will become contaminated. They will become polluted. And
when they are polluted, "strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya", "Vṛ...", Ar..., Krishna is
a descendant of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty. So, He is called as "vārṣṇeya".

        strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya

Then:

        jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

Then, "varṇa-saṅkaraḥ" will be born. This is a very deep of c..., thought, which
we may not think about in our, with our current co..., conceptual and cultural
framework. Actually, in the Vedic culture, bringing, bringing forth good
dynasty, good progeny, and continuing the dynasty is considered a very important
responsibility. And for that purpose, having good marriages, and having healthy
families is important. Now, if the, when the dharma is not protected. What
does that mean? That means say, it can happen in various ways. Here, the
ksatriyas are going to fight. And ksatriyas will kill each other. And the
ksatriyas are killed, then unscrupulous men will assume power. And when they
assume power, they will exploit the women. And when they exploit the women, from
that, what will happen is, "varṇa-saṅkaraḥ" will be born. So, what is
"varṇa-saṅkaraḥ"? This unwanted progeny. Now, what do we mean by unwanted
progeny? Nowadays, people think unwanted progeny means, oh, you know, we did
some birth control. But then, the baby we did not expect came up. And then, we
decided that we could not do abortion. So, the child was born. So, people think
unwanted, unwanted child means that we lose some birth control. And when birth
control does not work, and the child comes, that is unwanted. But that is not
the context of Krishna and Arjuna at the time, five thousands years go. Unwanted
progeny means, actually, progeny with poor consciousness. Progeny with degraded
mindsets. So, actually, it is a profound science about, you know, how children
are born. That science is not just material. Yes, even from material point of
view, how the, you know, sperm through the semen enters and then impregnates the
woman. And then how the embryo grows. And how from that, a child is born. It is
a fascinating science. And how from one small cell, a whole human being, like
even me, is born. It is a, it is actually miraculous. It is a miracle that only
God can do. And he does it repeatedly. In fact, all of us are miracles like
that. All of us means our bodies, at least. So, it is quite a miraculous
process. But here, the, the talk that is over here, is about the contact. You
know, how the consciousness of the soul is determined by the consciousness of
the couple during their contact, during their union. So, it is described in the
Vedic scriptures that the kind of souls that impregnate the mother of womb
through this womb, they are determined by certain important factors. And those
are the consciousness of the mother and the father. So, if they are completely
in the throes of passion, then, because they are in the throes of passion, then,
a passionate soul is attracted over there. If they are in ignorance, then there
is a, you know, European mov..., music star, who said that, most people are born
over a bottle of whiskey on Saturday night. So, that is how it is
"varṇa-saṅkaraḥ". You know, most people, you know, people just get along for
fulfilling their carnal desires. And then, they, so, begetting of children is
just a side o..., side product of that. So, when that is the case, then that
actually leads to, you know, leads to a, souls of degraded consciousness
appearing. When souls of degraded consciousness appear, at that time, it is very
difficult for them to be regulated.

Now, we may wonder, actually, the souls are going to be born somewhere or the
other. You know, souls need body. So, they are going to get the body. So, what
is the difference? This is like saying that, you know, actually, there are going
to be criminals. So, why not criminals be there in my house? You know, who will
want criminals in my house or my city? Sometimes, when the person is, you know,
very, where the citizen is very troublesome, that citizen may be executed. Or if
not executed, he may be exiled. So, exile is one level below execution. You are
a troublemaker. We do not want you in our kingdom. So, now, it is not our
problem that where all the souls, who are there, where they should get their
bodies? Our problem is how we can liberate ourselves. And how we can liberate
others. Those who are dependents. Those who are our progeny. And while we are
liberating them, then how we can further also take the, do good in the world
while we are here? Follow "dharmāḥ" and do good here as much as it is possible.
But when there are children with low consciousness, then it becomes very
difficult to maintain the kind of order in society. So:

        praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ
        ...
        ... varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

So, actually, when the man and the woman unite in a prayerful consciousness,
after having done due prayers, Garbhā..., it is called Garbhādhāna saṃskār,
then, I, actually a, a wonderful child is born from there. Now, the purport of
Srila Prabhupada can be here quite provocative and inflammatory from the point
of view of today's cultural milieu. You know, Prabhupada's, writes, he quotes
Cāṇakya Paṇḍita that women are less intelligent. And:

"According to Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, women are generally not very intelligent and
therefore not trustworthy."

So, now, you know, you may, what is the, what is this, a blanket statement? They
are not very intelligent. And how do we understand this statement? So, there is,
there are various ways of looking at. Now, if we look at, that is, is this
referring to spiritual intelligence? Actually, as souls, the souls are neither
male, nor female. At least, not, the bodily gender does not apply to the soul.
So, the same soul can today be in a male body, tomorrow in a female body. And
vice versa. So, therefore, it is not that the soul is less intelligent. Then, is
the body less intelli..., is the, at the per..., is this referring to material
intelligence? Are women less intelligent at the material level? You may say
that, actually, when women are given career opportunities, they are excellent in
so many fields. You know, they are often the topper in schools and colleges. And
they are excellent in so many fields. So, how are they less intelligent? So, if
materially, we do not find women to be less intelligent. Spiritually, we do not
find the souls to be of at any different levels of intelligence. Then, where is
this r..., r..., referring to? Actually, it is referring to the interaction of
soul and body. See, the word intelligence is used in a different sense in
different contexts in different cultures. We often use intelligence in terms of
our capacity to manipulate, to control, organiser matter. And IQ scores are
basically to organise concepts. So, that is one understanding of intelligence.
However, in the Vedic context, intelligence refers to understanding a, the
fundamental truths of life. And those truths of life are I am not the body. I am
the soul. That is the beginning. It is ABC of spiritual life. So, generally
speaking, in the female body, the bodily i..., misidentification is far greater
than in the male body. Because for a woman, practically speaking, her whole
sense of self-worth and self-identity comes from the body. You know, how good do I
look. How many heads do I turn. How many people do I attract. So, that is a very
important, in fact, defining, in many ways, criteria for a woman's
self-conception. And, of course, once a person becomes a devotee, things may
change. But the important point is that the body, the bodily misidentification
is much stronger in a female body. And not only that, along with that, there is
certain level of, in the female body, the sentimentality is more on the
rationality. That is not necessarily bad. Prabhupada says that you know, women
can become devotees more easily. They have a tendency to accept God and bow down
to God. And they can practice spiritual l..., they can practice especially
devotional life more easily. But, they, we, we have, that sentamentality can
also lead to them being misled, being misguided. So, when, when people can speak
some sweet words to them. And tell them how beautiful you are, and flatter them,
and then exploit them. So, sen..., their sentamentality is there. And the
counterbalance in the sentamentality, there has to be rationality. Now, the
rational faculty is more, relative speaking, in men. And the rational faculty is
foundational for philosophical inquiry, for metaphysical study. And that is
actually the, in one sense, the beginning of serious spiritual search. So, here,
the context is from the point of view of these two things, that b..., the
greater bodily misidentification, that is why less intelligent. And because
there is a, there is the female body itself has, female psychology has a greater
level of sentamentality than, than rationality. That is why it is said that
women are not to be trusted. But now, if we see, these are statements, which
are, w..., which are given. But along with that, we also understand there are
exceptions. So, the exceptions also have to be understood carefully. And
especially, this is not apply to me. Sometimes, Srila Prabhupada used an
argument that, actually, the female brain is smaller than the male brain. And
that proves that men are l..., wo..., women are less intelligent than men. So,
now, subsequent research has shown that that is not always true. First of all,
there is several problems with this argument. That, firstly, whether the brain
size itself is indicative of intelligence. It is not necessarily that. Just
because that person has a big brain, that means that person big intelligence.
Secondly, the brain size also is dependent on the overall body size. So, in
general, males have a bigger body than females. So, naturally, the whole body is
bigger. Then, the f..., when the brain will also be bigger. So, both ways,
whether the bigger brain size correlates with a bigger intelligence. And the,
and whether males have a bigger brain than females, that is not very clear. And
if you take the proportions, then it turns out that, actually, male, women can
have bigger brains than males have. So, then, what is Prabhupada using this
argument for? 30:12
