Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oT7DyZUy4OA
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=oT7DyZUy4OA&redir_token=FyNxG-msNgXwzJ1BXEc6FV2FDwp8MTU0ODQ4NzY3N0AxNTQ4NDAxMjc3&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_064_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_27_to_32_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita study, the part of the Bhakti Shastri
course. Today, we are discussing the third chapter. And we are going into the
section, the fourth section, which discusses about how karma-yoga is different
from karma-kanda. Karma-kanda causes bondage. Karma-yoga does not cause bondage.
So, 3.25 and 26 talked about the contrast between the "vidvāṁ" and "asaktāḥ".
Those who are enlightened and detached as contrasted with those who are ignorant
and attached. "avidvāṁ" and "saktāḥ". So, now, what is the difference between
these two? That will be talked in the next three verses. So, the 3.27, which we
will discuss today is a famous verse. Prabhupada would quote this quite
frequently.

        prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni
        guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ
        ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā
        kartāham iti manyate

So, "prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni". "kriyamāṇāni" means being done. "kriya" is action.
So, "kriyamāṇāni" is being done. So, that which is done by "prakṛteḥ".

        prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni
        guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

So, the "guṇaiḥ"s of "prakṛteḥ". They do the actions. "ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā". The
conditioned soul is "vimūḍhā", is deluded by "ahaṅkāra". "ahaṅkāra" is ego.
"kartā", "aham". Thinks that I am the doer. "iti manyate". One who thinks. Now,
what does this verse actually mean? You know, if it says that everything is done
by the three modes, then what is, what is the reason or rationale for the
Bhagavad Gita telling Arjuna do this, do not do this? Act in this way. Do not
act in this way. What would be the logic for all this if the Bhagavad Gita were
actually telling this their, message that everything is done by the three modes?
So, actually, the scriptures, you know, give philosophy within a context. And
the context has to be understood. So, the important point in this is, here, that
the modes are the doer. And the soul, who thinks that I am the doer is a, is
deluded, is "vimūḍhā". The important point is to understand that the soul is not
the only doer. The oul is..., soul is definitely a doer. But the soul is not the
only doer. The soul is one of the doers. So, let us consider this now. You know,
the soul is one of the doers. What does it mean? It essentially means that the
soul is, you know, initiating the action. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa used the
example in Vedanta Sutra that a woodcutter cuts trees. So, in his
Govinda-bhāṣya, explains that when a woodcutter cuts the tree. Who is actually
cutting the three? It is not the woodcutter. It is the axe. So, without the axe,
if the woodcutter goes and starts hitting with the hands. The woodcutter will
not be able to cut the tree. So, for cutting a tree, the tool, that is the axe,
is essential. So, the cutter of the tree is actually the axe. But at the same
time, the axe will not move on its own. The axe has the capacity to cut. But the
axe does not have the consciousness by which to decide whether to cut or to not
cut. So, the axe moves because there is a conscious being who desires to cut a
tree. So, therefore, now, among these two that the woodcutter decides, desiring
and deciding to cut the tree. And the acts being used to cut the tree. Which are
important? Which is important? Both are important. You know, it depends on the
context. So, similarly, when we talk about b..., b..., our actions in this
world. So, for example, right now, I am speaking. So, how am I speaking? It is
through the body. The voice boxes producing some sound. So, there is basically
the organ of speech which is enabling me to speak. So, now, without this organ
of speech, I will not be able to speak. At the same time, even if that organ of
speech is present, if I do not have the desire to speak, I will not, or...,
speak. No sound will come out. So, the organ of speech is like the tool for
speaking. And the soul is the person. Soul is like the woodcutter. So, both of
them have to come together and speak. Now, this is with respect to normal
actions. Which we do. When Krishna is talking about here, He says that,
actually, our actions, the way we are inclined to act. And the way we, the, act,
it is largely determined by the three modes. So, somebody walks very
passionately, in a very driven way to achieve something. So, somebody decides
that I want to climb up Mount Everest. And then, works very hard. Trains.
Develops a lot of muscle and stamina. And then, starts the climb. And there is a
lot of courage despite the danger and, you know, a, possible disaster.

And sl..., keeps persevering, persevering, perse..., finally climbed up Mount
Everest. So, who actually did the climbing? It was the person, the soul or was
it body? It is the body that did the climbing. The body is the tool. And the
body is governed by the laws of material nature. The body being governed by the
laws of material nature. You know. The soul has a particular s..., kind of
desires which also are governed by material nature. Not governed entirely. But
generally, for the soul, the gamut of choice of desires is determined by
material nature. What does it mean? Suppose, a student gets an exam. The
competitive exam. Get the, what is the capital of India? Moscow, Washington,
London. Three option. Say. The, no fourth option. These, you know, the, now,
these are the capital, what should I do? You know, that is all options. You have
to take only one of them. What will you do then? So, actually, here, whichever
answer this is, the 06:37
