Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xDXUGagiF7g
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=xDXUGagiF7g&event=video_description&redir_token=_qAU2mPfivTcf5dWM0NNnn2J3it8MTU0ODQ4NzQ0N0AxNTQ4NDAxMDQ3&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_057_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_60_to_63_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        oḿ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā
        cakṣur unmīlitaḿ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita course. On the second chapter, we
are now moving to the end of the second answer and then to the third answer. Let
us start at once. So, second answer was, the four questions were. 
"sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā". "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". So, actually, "kā bhāṣā" and "kiṁ
prabhāṣeta", they are very related questions. So, "kā bhāṣā", the question is
answered in 55. Then, "kiṁ prabhāṣeta". What is his language? That is answered
in 56 and 57. So, actually, we are discussing third question now. That is
answered from 58 to 63. So, and then, after that, that was "kim āsīta". How does
that person control the senses? How does that person regulate the senses? And
then, "kim vrajeta" will be answered from 64 onwards. So, let us look at 59 now.
The, so, we discussed till 59, actually. So, let us start with 60 now.

        yatato hy api kaunteya
        puruṣasya vipaścitaḥ
        indriyāṇi pramāthīni
        haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ

"yatato". "yatato" is to endeavor. "hy api kaunteya". So, oh, K..., oh,
kaunteya, oh, Arjuna, even when a pen..., person is endeavoring, certainly
endeavoring. "puruṣasya vipaścitaḥ". Which kind of person? "vipaścitaḥ". Person
who has discrimination. Who has the capacity to know what is right and what is
wrong. And even for such a person, "indriyāṇi pramāthīni". "pramātha" is like
madness, storm. So, "indriyāṇi pramāthīni", the wild and impetuous senses.
"haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ". "haranti" means they drag away. They steal away.
"prasabhaṁ manaḥ". So, they drag away thoroughly by force, "prasabhaṁ manaḥ".
So, now, there are several important features of this verse. The, Krishna, here,
is not talking about or..., ordinary person who is controlled by the senses. So,
materialistic people think that the goal of their life is to enjoy their senses.
So, often, they let themselves be dragged by their senses. So, such people are,
who are interested in material sense gratification even if that material sense
gratification is by religious means. You know. Today, that means there are
vikarmis. There are karmis. And then, there are yogis. So, vikarmis are those
who chase after sense gratification, you know, and defy the principles of dharma
in the process. So, for example, say, people who have extramarital, premarital
relationships. And that sort of thing. Those people are vikarmis. Then, those
people, who are karmis, those are people who seek sense gratification, but by
religious means. So, Krishna has talked about them in the previous section in
2.42-43. He talks about the aspire for svarga. For what purpose? "kāmātmānaḥ
svarga-parā". And there, He has used for them the word "avipaścitaḥ".

        yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ
        pravadanty avipaścitaḥ
        veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha
        nānyad astīti vādinaḥ

So, those people think that, they are attrac..., be attracted by the flowery
words of the Vedas. They think that the sense gratification promised in the
Vedas is the ul..., in, in svarga, is the ultimate goal of life. And "nānyad
astīti vādinaḥ". They say there is nothing else. So, such people are
"avipaścitaḥ". So, the "avipaścitaḥ" are the people who do not understand that
there is a higher goal of life beyond sense gratification. That that sense
gratification ultimately comes, keeps one in bodily consciousness. And the
higher happiness is available by raising to spiritual consciousness. So, these
are "avipaścitaḥ". People are the karmis. Now, higher than them are the yogis.
The yogis are "vipaścitaḥ". They understand that material enjoyment leads to
suffering, leads to bondage. It perpetuates illusion. Therefore, I must break
free from it. You know, so su..., even such people, Krishna is saying, those who
are "vipaścitaḥ". Those who have discrimination. Those who can understand the
difference between matter and spirit. And based on that differentiation, they
try to pursue, you know, spiritual reality. Spiritu..., self-realisation. So,
even such people, so, they, e..., they have vision. They have discrimination.
And then "yatato". They are also striving. That means there are these two
aspects. There is "vipaścitaḥ". Internally, they have discrimination. And
internally, they also have it, they, they have that endeavoring. They are
trying to endeavor. But even such people, what happens to them? "haranti
prasabhaṁ manaḥ". What are they trying to do? They are trying to control their
senses. Sorry. They are trying to control themselves. But the senses are so
wild. Their senses drag away the mind. Now, it is interesting. Krishna is saying
senses drag away the mind. So, let us try to understand this point now. So,
first point is that these are not ordinary materialists Krishna is talking
about. They are not vikarmis. They are not karmis. They are yogis. Those who are
"vipaścitaḥ". And those who are "yatato". So, they have knowledge. And they are
striving to live according to knowledge. Even they are dragged away. So, most of
us, you know, fall in this category. Or actually, this category of people being
dragged away by the senses may be a little higher than what we are, also. You
know, we, often, pursue senses gratification, also, by, within, you know, the
precincts of dharma. You know, but here, K..., somebody is trying to break free
from sense gratification. What about such a person? Krishna says over here that
such a person. The s..., the, so, there is a hierarchy. There are the senses.
There are the sense objects. So, ok, ok, the sense objects are here. The senses
are here. And the mind is here. So, we, you know, connect with the sense objects
through the senses. You know, for example, that the eyes see some beautiful
form. The, you know, a, tongue wants to taste some deli..., delicious food item.
So, senses come in contact with sense objects. Now, the senses are internally
connected with the mind. In fact, the mind is a center of all the senses.

        śrotraṁ cakṣuḥ sparśanaṁ ca
        rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva ca
        adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ
        viṣayān upasevate

So, Krishna describes in 15.9 that the five senses, "śrotram", "cakṣuḥ",
"sparśa", "rasa", and "ghrāṇam". So, the ears, the, the sensation of s...,
sight, then touch, fragrance, smell, and taste. All these are centered around
the mind, just as, we could say that the five fingers are centered around the
palm. So, now, the senses are internally connected to the mind. And Krishna is
saying, so, if you consider this hierarchy, there are the sen..., ok, the sense
objects are here, outside. The senses are here. And the mind is inside. So, the
senses drag away the mind. That means the mind is, when we expose ourselves
externally to sense objects, then, the desires that are created by that, so
that, by that cr..., perception of the sense objects. By that, the mind is
forcefully drawn towards that. And when the mind is drawn towards that, then,
you know, our desires get further ignited, fueled. They become inflamed. And
then, we, just like, a motor, drawn towards fire, we are drawn towards the sense
objects. So, here, Krishna is giving a warning about if one just simply b...,
if, now, the, the 58 verse, He said that, one should withdraw the senses, just
like a, a tortoise withdraws the limbs. But here, Krishna is saying that, if one
f..., one is striving to do that. But somehow, if one, you know, the senses are
so powerful, that when senses perceive the sense objects, now, tuck. The senses
drag the mind outwards. "haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ". So, this is quite a sobering
verse to contemplate. Such is the power of the senses. That even when we want to
control, still, we are dragged away. And we have all experienced this as we
tri..., strive for sense control. We find our senses just dragging us,
forcefully, desperately. Often, they make seem, they make us helpless entirely.
So, Prabhupada gives in these purports the example of Viswamitra muni. You know,
he was a, in the forest, and trying to pros..., pro..., practice austerity. But
when he heard the ankle bells of Menaka. Then, just that thought agitated him.
And then, he just forgot everything else. And he got attracted. Now, we may
think, how is this? If somebody has renounced the world, somebody is pros...,
pro..., practicing austerity, how is it that just the, you know, the jingling of
some ankle bells can cause a person to get just dragged down like this? So,
actually 10:12
