Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s9in3s6eqYk
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=s9in3s6eqYk&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_084_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_06_Text_24_to_32_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=Jk6MiIndm7CIueTLubK1Jvtdc0p8MTU0ODQ4ODI5OEAxNTQ4NDAxODk4

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now in 6.24. We discussed the samadhi verses. And now, Krishna will talk about
how one can attain the state of samadhi. So, the chapter, as I explained, has a
flow from sadhana to siddha. Then, again, from sadhana to siddha. And then
again, from sadhana to siddha. And as it moves forward, in the first
progression, it talks about Brahman realisation. That is from verses 10 to 15.
Then, from 16 to 23, it talks about Paramatma realisation. And 24 to 32, it
talks about Bhagavan realisation. That is how we are progressing. So, let us
start with the verse 24, now. So:

        sa niścayena yoktavyo
        yogo ’nirviṇṇa-cetasā
        saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs
        tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ

N..., so:

        manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ
        viniyamya samantataḥ

"sa niścayena yoktavyo". So, one starts practicing with determination. "sa
niścayena". "niścayena" means determination. We have discussed earlier in our
Upadesamrta about how "utsāhān", "niścayād", "dhairyāt". So, "sa niścayena
yoktavyo". With determination, one engages. "yogo ’nirviṇṇa-cetasā". "nirviṇṇa"
means dejected. And Prabhupada, deviated. So, "nirviṇṇa". One can deject...,
dejected, deviated. "nirviṇṇa-cetasā". One does not let oneself get deviated.
So, one engages in devotional service, you know, in, in the practice of
yoga in general. It can also refer to devotional service in the ultimate sense.
"sa niścayena". With determination. And determination. What does determination
means? That means, there is no deviation. So, actually, the nature of the mind,
and the nature of the world are such that they will us take off-track. But we
bring ourselves back on track. Again. And again. And yet again. That is the
essential process of bhakti-yoga. And of any yoga, in general. So, "yogo
’nirviṇṇa-cetasā". And what do we need to, to be able to do this?
"saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs". There are mat..., many, many material desires which
come up. M..., "kāmāṁs" in material desire. And "saṅkalpa" is the resolution to
enjoy those material desires. There is "saṅkalpa". And there is "vikalpa". So,
"saṅkalpa" means I want this. "vikalpa" means I do not want this. "saṅkalpa"
manifests itself as the karma section in the Vedic scriptures. "karma-kanda".
Yes, this is, I, I wa..., want to enjoy this. And this is what I will do to
enjoy it. So, in a sense, the difference between "saṅkalpa" and kama is,
"saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs". What does it mean is that, m..., because there is
kama, there is the desire to enjoy. And then, that leads to the resolution.
"saṅkalpa" means resolution. You know. Resolution to enjoy. So, one gives up the
resolution to enjoy. That is born of lust. So, it is significant. Krishna is not
saying over here one gives up lust. Because giv..., giving up lust will take a
long time. The lusty desires may come. And they may g..., you know, they may
stay in our mind. But we decide, not to act on their..., them. So, in the
Bhagavatam, also, you know, in the Seventh Canto, when it is talked about how
different anarthas can be overcommitted is: 

        asaṅkalpāj jayet kāmaṁ

"asaṅkalpāj jayet kāmaṁ" means that by making firm resolutions, one can break
free. One can get rid of the kama. So, one decides, just leave, so, the acharyas
give the example, Chakravarti Pada, and Srila Prabhupada, also, that, if one
decides on ekadashi, I am not going to eat grains. You know, that resolution,
once it is there, by making, a, by not making plans to eat on, a, eat grains on
ekadashi. One is able to, you know, a..., th..., at least save off that desire
for eating. For that particular day. You know. So, like that, h..., there is a
difference between desiring and planning. So, desiring is something which we may
not be able to avoid. But planning is something which we can avoid. So,
"saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs". That mans with the, from kama, the "saṅkalpa" that
is born, one gives up. "tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ". So, one gives them, a...,
"tyaktvā". So, Krishna is very emphatic over there. If you want to be
"’nirviṇṇa". If you want to be "sa niścayena yoktavyo". What do we have to do?
"tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ". We give up all the material desires. "aśeṣataḥ". Do
not keep even one desire. You know. If there is a dham. Hmm. The dham may be
gigantic structure made of extremely strong stone or concrete. Or such other
material. But if there is one crack in it. That one crack is enough. Through
that one crack, what will go? Little. Then, little. Then, little more. And then,
more. And then, eventually, through that crack, the water will go through in
such a force, such a quanity, that, eventually, because of that, the whole
dhram..., dham can collapse. If that dha..., if that whole, that crack is not
fixed in time. So, a tiny crack can lead to a mighty crash. A tiny crack can
lead to a mighty crash. Therefore, the tiny crack should also be sealed. That is
where Krishna is telling over here, "tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ". So, there is a
double emphasis over here. "sarvān" is one emphasis. All. And "aśeṣataḥ" is
another emphasis. Nothing remaining. That means, give it up completely. "tyaktvā
sarvān aśeṣataḥ". And then, "manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ". What does one do?
"manasā". "eva". "indriya-grāmam". That means, with the mind, and with the
senses. "viniyamya samantataḥ". "samantataḥ". With, with, so, one, with the mind
and the senses. One brings the, you know, brings oneself under control. So,
"manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ". So, Prabhupada says, control all the senses on all
sides by the mind. Now, sometimes, the question arises that does the mind drag
the senses? You know. There is this mind, you know, take the senses in the wrong
direction? Or the senses take the mind in wrong direction? Actually, it can
happen both ways. The mind can take the senses in wrong directions. Or the
senses can take the mind in wrong directions. How is, both is possible? It
depends on where is the trigger of temptation coming from. Sometimes, the
trigger for temptation comes from outside. That means we see something
externally which agitates us. And when it agitates us, then, from the senses,
the trigger comes in. And it triggers us internally. Then, the imagination, the
fascination, all that gets stimulated. And then, we act on it. So, when the
trigger of temptation is coming from outside to inside, that means the senses
are agitating the mind. And sometimes, the trigger of temptation can come from
inside. That means, we remember based on our past life. What do we remember
based on that? We remember that, oh, this is what went wrong. This is what I had
done in the past. Now, we do not think of it as wrong. You know. At that time.
We just remember, oh, this is what I had done. And, you know, we just remember,
oh, it was so enjoyable at that time. So, we get into that. And when we get into
that, the trigger of temptation, the mind gets agitated. And then, the mind
takes the senses towards sense gratification. That means, you know, th...,
first, we, we do not necessarily see some provocative object externally. But we
imagine something internally. And then, we ourselves go towards the sense
object. And then, we indulge in it. So:

        manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ
        viniyamya samantataḥ

Now, Krishna is telling over here, with the mind, control the senses. Now, the
significance of this is that the yogi who is practicing ashtanga-yoga has
already withdrawn away from the world of temptation. The yogi is no longer
situated in the materialistic c..., environment. The yogi has gone to the
jungle. And in that sense, in the environment of the forest, there are not many
external triggers of temptation. So, m..., m..., the triggers of temptation for
a yogi who has gone to the forest are primarily internal. And with the mind, one
control the senses. That means that one understand that the mind, you know, it
may come up with some memories. Oh, I had enjoyed like that. I had done like
that. I had done like that. And then, once those desires come up, then one
starts acting on the senses, also. But one controls at the level of the mind.
And then, one does not let the senses get active. So, with the mind, one
controls the senses. That means we do not go towards the sense objects. And do
not let the senses get in..., exposed to sense objects by placing us in that
environment. Where such contact would happen too much. So, for us, we cannot
avoid the contact. We live in a, a contaminated environment where there are
provocative stimuli all around us. So, how do we deal with them? We deal with
them by, you know, inner restraint. So:

        manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ
        viniyamya samantataḥ

So, the point is, externally, whether there are triggers or not, the real fall,
you know, actually happens internally first. That is why in, you know, 2.62,
also. Krishna talks about "dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ". As the beginning of the
fall. That is in it. "dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ". It is not seeing the sense
objects. It is contemplating on sense objects that begins the downward fall. So,
now, all material desires born of, one gives them up. And one fixes oneself on
the Supreme Lord. So, now, here, Krishna is not telling exactly what one should
fix on. He will tell it later on in the Bhagavad Gita. But we understand,
Bhagavad Gita ultimately recommends the process of bhakti-yoga. And in
bhakti-yoga, one is recommended to fix the mind on the Supreme Lord. Now, here,
the yogi is trying to learn, go inwards. And trying to, you know, fix the mind
on the at..., the dhy..., attma-tattva. That may be atma. It may Paramatma.
Depending on how evolved the yogi's understanding is. So, now, Prabhupada in
this purport gives the exam..., story of the sparrow. And the m..., ocean who
had taken the eggs of the sparrow. And a, the sparrow is determined to get the
eggs back. And when the eggs could not, you know, the ocean did not care. Then,
the sparrow became determined. I will dry up the ocean. The determination was
impossible. But the impossible determination attracted the unstoppable power of
Garuda. And when Garuda said, I would dry up the ocean. And the ocean took it
very seriously. And gave the eggs back. So, what does this illustration
illustra..., you know, you know, demonstrate, exemplify? Actually, our
conditionings are like an ocean. This material existence is itself consi...,
compared to an ocean sometimes. And within that, our conditionings are also
o..., oceanic. And deep within those conditionings is the love of God. Just like
the bird had its eggs. Which were taken away by the ocean. So, the, so, deep
with, under this vast ocean of conditionings, there is the potential love of
God. The love for God which has been misdirected now to other things. So, for
us, to remove all our conditionings is next to impossible. But if we just keep
practicing devotional service. So, every maha mantra that we chant is like
one, removing one drop from the ocean. It is one moment we are trying to live
purely. So, keep practicing. Keep practicing. Just by the, every moment that we
try to remember Krishna. Try to serve Krishna. It is like removing one drop from
the ocean. We can never dry up the ocean. But by our sincere endeavor, we can
attract the mercy of the Lord. And when we attract the mercy of the Lord, then
the Lord does miracles. And the Lord enables us to, the, it is actually the Lord
who manifests His miraculous potency through, you know, m..., the spiritual
master. The, Garuda represents the spiritual master over here. And then, one is
able to become free. One is able to become rescued. You know. Liberated from the
conditioning. And reinstated in our original pure love for Krishna. So,
Prabhupada ma..., says that, Prabhupada says in the purport that it:

"may appear to be a very difﬁcult job. But if anyone follows the principles with
great determination, the Lord will surely help, for God helps those who help
themselves."

So, now, this is a common saying among people to take God helps those who help
themselves. What is the Ve..., a, V..., Vedic understanding of this?
Prabhupada himself is quoting it. So, now, many times, when people,
materialistic people, or people who are not devotionally-minded quote this.
Actually, their emphasis is often on do not just sit and pray. Do not just do
this puja. Do not just jappa. Work. You know. Those who help your...,
themselves, God will help them. So, the idea is, so, often, for them, when they
speak, their emphasis is not on God helps. Their emphasis is on help themselves.
So, the emphasis what? You help yourself. Then, God will help you. So, the,
the, for them, God's help is like a sideshow. You know. Real thing is you help
yourself. Unless you endeavor, you are not going to get the results. So, you
know, do not, so, the, often people talk about in such a way do not waste your
time in praying. Do not waste your time in just doing all sort of nonsense.
It is just, actually, work. Help yourself. Then, God will help you. So, in
principle, the statement is true. But the emphasis has to be clearly understood.
Actually, when Prabhupada is speaking the story, the point is, it is God's help
which is decisive. So, it is God's help which brings about the result. And God's
help cannot be neglected. It should not be neglected just for the sake of
helping ourselves. In fact, the best way we can help ourselves is by taking
God's help. The best way we can help ourselves is by taking God's help. So, God
helps those who help themselves. That is true. But how do we help ourselves? By
taking God's help. So, in fact, we do not even have to take God's help. God is
already there in our heart. And He wants to help us. We simply have to stop
obstructing His help. Just like a doctor wants to treat the patient. And all
that the patient has to do is cooperate. You know. Stop interfering with the
treatment. And the doctor will cure. So, like that, we will be cured. You know.
We just have to stop interrupting. We just have to stop letting ourselves be
distracted. So, God will help us. So, there is a, there should not be a wrong
emphasis on this. The proper empha..., as devotees, we have to chant Hare
Krishna. No doubt. But it is not our chanting that will purify us. It is
Krishna's mercy that will purify us. Let us move forward. Now, Krishna will
start talking about the process of m..., pratyahara. As I said, we are going
from sadhana to siddha.

        śanaiḥ śanair uparamed
        buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā
        ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā
        na kiñcid api cintayet

So, "śanaiḥ śanair". Slowly. Step by step. "uparamed". "uparamed" means to slow
down. To calm down. To silence. Slowly. Gradually. Step by step. The word
"śanaiḥ śanair" itself conveys slo..., slowly. Gradually. And how does one that,
do that? "buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". "buddhyā". "buddhyā" means intelligence. And
how is this intelligence? "dhṛti-gṛhītayā". "dhṛti" is determined, is actually
determination or conviction. So, actually, our determination comes from our
conviction in many ways. If I am convinced about something, I will be determined
to do it. So, determination is internal. Conviction is external. Both of them
are related. So, now, Krishna is saying, "buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". We should
not. We do not just need intelligence. We need intelligence sustained by
conviction. For example, when I am taking a treatment. If the treatment happ...,
involves, you know, you know, something m..., m..., some painful procedures.
Then, I may now understand with my intelligence. Oh, this treatment is going to
cure me. Oh, so, I should do it. But when I actually have started taking the
treatment. And initially, there is discomfort. But it also cured me. Then, after
that, when I take the treatment. Then, I will find and say, does really cure me.
So, that is why we need both. We need intelligence. And we need conviction. When
there is intelligence sustained by conviction, then there is cure. Otherwise,
there is no cure. So, that is why intelli..., you know, in the, no cure means in
the sense that the c..., curative potency is still there. But we do not
consistently practice. You know. That is why we do not get the cure. So,
"buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". Intelligence sustained by conviction. "buddhyā
dhṛti-gṛhītayā". So, what should we do? Just like a child, a child, when he goes
to doctor. The child does not have intelligence to understand the doctor's
medicine will cure me. But "buddhyā". The mother understands. The child, once,
the child experiences, oh, this was so, irritative. This injection. But after
that, it f...,, it may be, feel much better. So, he says, then, I will do it.
Then, I will take it. "buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". "dhṛti" means conviction.
"buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā". What should one do is, "ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā".
Fix the mind on the soul. "manaḥ". "manaḥ" is mind. "ātma-saṁsthaṁ". Situated on
the soul.

        ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā
        na kiñcid api cintayet

Do not think about anything else. Krishna is giving a very categorical
instruction over here. "na kiñcid api cintayet". Do not think about anything
else. How is it possible? For someone to not think about anything else? It is by
steady practice. So, once, one is convinced that actually, the material
realm, reality is all deceptive. It is treacherous. It will betray me. It will
promise pleasure. And it will give misery. Then, one will be able to focus. And
understand that, actually, I have to turn. I have to turn away from the material
reality towards the spiritual reality. And how I turn from the material reality
to spiritual reality is by conviction and practice. So, understand, there is
nothing, nothing substantial over here. So, let me move towards that. And let me
focus on that. And when we focus thus on that, we can move forward steadily
onwards. Onwards. Onwards. So, here, Krishna is talking about the stage of, you
know, m..., in one's own, prat..., in pratyahara, what happens? One shuts
out all the sense object. So, one turns inwards. And one puts out all the
stimula that outwards. So, we should not become impatient in our spiritual
practice. Sometimes, we will find that we want to fix the mind in one way. But
still, the mind goes of another way. But we fix it on one way. But still goes
another way. So, how do we deal with? "śanaiḥ śanair". Gradually. Step by step.
Nothing great in this world is achieved overnight. Everything great requires
effort. So, fixing the mind on Krishna. And learn, training ourselves to be
Krishna Conscious is not going to happen overnight. It will require steady
practice. Day after day. Month after month. "śanaiḥ śanair". Gradually. One of
the biggest obstacles in spiritual path can be too much impatience with oneself.
You know. We should not be impatient with ourselves. We should be impatient as
far as our endeavors are concerned. You know. If I am sleeping during chanting.
I must wake up and chant. But, you know, if my mind is wandering. If I am too
impatient with myself. Then, I will never be able to treat myself. Because, you
know, I will just get discouraged. I will give it up. We cannot be impatient. We
have to understand that, you know, the purification will take time. Just as, you
know, when we want to cook some food item. We will want it fast. But it takes
its own time. If we want to harvest crops. It takes its own time. So, nature has
its own course. So, one of the reasons for discouragement in spiritual life is
impatience. So, even if it takes time, no matter how long it takes, I will keep
practicing Krishna Consciousness. I started practicing. I was knocked on by
conditions. Again I get. Again I get. Knocked off. Again I get. So, if we have
become impatient with the fight, the only result will be that we will give up
the fight. One, you know, will give up the fight. But we patiently go on. No
longer, how, no matter how long it takes. We may say, actually, every time I am
coming in the same mistake, I am falling back to the same things. What is the
hope for me to become reformed? No. There is hope. Because every day that we are
practicing devotional service, we are becoming stronger. We are becoming purer.
And as we keep becoming stronger and purer, we will eventually, that purity will
manifest. So, hmm, when we are, say, fighting a box in my ha...., you know,
every time a person is doing exercise and taking in nutritious diet. That person
become strong. But still, the opponent may knock that person down. But the only
way that person is going to win the match is by keeping on persevering. So,
"śanaiḥ śanair". Gradually. Step by step. So, this is from the stage of, it is,
Prabhupada say that:

"By proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyāhāra."

"pratyāhāra" is the fifth stage in yoga. And then:

"The mind, being controlled by conviction, meditation and cessation from the
senses, should be situated in trance, or samādhi."

So, this is the perfection. So, "pratyāhāra" to "samādhi". This is the inner
progression. It is talked about. Now, we may wonder that what does it mean to
do this slowly? The mind keeps running here and there. So, what do we do about
it? 22:30
