Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TQcg8rA2KMs
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_051_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_02_Text_18_to_21_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=TQcg8rA2KMs&redir_token=DNRGW_Ex8BMwsqoXgnus2VPX_uR8MTU0ODQ4NzI0N0AxNTQ4NDAwODQ3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita discussion. Today, we will
discuss from 2.18 onwards. Yesterday, we discussed 2.17, "avināśi tu tad
viddhi". Let us move to the next verse now.

        antavanta ime dehā
        nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ
        anāśino ’prameyasya
        tasmād yudhyasva bhārata

So, "antavanta ime dehā". This "dehā". This body. "ime dehā" is "antavanta". It
is going to end. It is bound to end. "nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ". But that which is
inside the body. "śarīriṇaḥ". Earlier, with the word that used "dehā". So, now,
it is "śarīriṇaḥ". That is "nitya". "nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ". "anāśino
’prameyasya".  So, that is imme..., that is indestructible. "anāśino". And it is
"’prameyasya". It is immeasurable. "tasmād yudhyasva bhārata". "tasmād yudhyasva
bhārata". So, that means what is the point? How does, how does the preceeding
lead to the conclusion you therefore fight? Actually, you know, the body is
indestruct..., the body is bound to be destroyed. But the soul is
indestructible. So, therefore, as you know, you will not be able to say dest...,
you will not be able to save the body even if you avoid fighting. And you will
not be able to destroy the soul even if you fight. So, therefore, that which is
the essential nature, which is unchangeable. Do not bother about, do not worry
yourself. Do not work yourself unnecessarily into a frenzy, f..., caused by
anxiety based on thinking that you will be able to save the soul. Or you will be
able to save the body. You will not be. And do not think that you will destroy
the soul. Because you will not. So, both ways, so, Prabhupada explains in the
purport that, actually, the "antavanta ime dehā". That the body may perish in
one day immediately. Or it may be after hundred years. It is a question of time
only. There is no chance of maintaining it indefinitely. So, all of us, we are
born with a death sentence on our head. You know, there is, you know, material
existence itself is a prison in which all of us have a death sentence on us. We
are all sentenced to death. So, the only thing is we do not know when the death
sen..., death sentence is going to come. How long we have to live, we do not
know. So, just as some product may come with a, pro..., all products come with
an expiry date. So, this body also comes with an expiry date. The only thing is
that we do not know when is the expiry date. But it is there. It can come the
next moment. It can come after a year. It can come after for..., thirty, fourty
years. But we are all going to die. Now, there is an interesting word over here.
"’prameyasya". so, "’prameyasya" means immeasurable. So, what does immeasurable
actually mean? Now, earlier, Srila Prabhupada has quoted in the, he says in the
previous purport itself that "keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya". That, actually, there is
the soul which is one t..., ten-thousandth of the tip of a hair. So, now,
immediately after Prabhupada quotes that, the "aprameyasya" comes up over here.
So, "aprameyasya" essentially means that, actually, it is not subject to
material measurement. So, it is not material. And it is not materially
measurable. There are dimensions. So, there are, it does have dimensions. But
those dimensions are not material. Tho..., they are a, spiritual dimensions.
Because the soul itself is spiritual. So, "aprameyasya" here refers to, it is so
small that it just cannot be measured by our instruments of perception. And it
is just immeasurable. So, it is n..., the, the immeasurableness is not just
because of smallness. Definitely, smallness is one factor. But along with that,
it is because of its spiritualist nature. So, "aprameyasya". And "tasmād
yudhyasva". So, now, what is the relation of "aprameyasya" with the context of
indestructibility? The point is that the "aprameyasya", it is so imperish..., it
is so small that even if Arjuna shoots arrows, arrows, arrows, hundreds of
arrows at a person. Now, we see in the Bhagavatam that Bhīṣma Pitamah was lying
on a bed of arrows. There was so many arrows that even a, a finger, it was a
figure, to put a finger through those arrows. So, there were so many arrows. But
none of those arrows penetrated the soul.

So, it is continuing the point that the soul is so small that no weapons will be
able to hit it. So, "aprameyasya". So, the "aprameya" is m..., given to, a,
further the point of indestructibility. We discussed in the previous verse,
2.17, how "yena sarvam idaṁ tatam". So, Rāmānujāchārya explains that the soul
pervades everything. The soul is so subtle that its consciousness pervades
everything. And, actually, nothing can destroy. So, the same point is being
continued over here. The soul is indestructible. Now, Krishna now gives a, so,
in one sense, Krishna has given a call for action in the, in the previous verse.
So, "tasmād yudhyasva bhārata". This one, same instruction will come again. So,
whenever scriptures a talk in, scriptures can have multiple tones. You know,
when Krishna is speaking, say, "dehino ’smin yathā dehe". That verse was there.
So, that is more of educational. Krishna is telling, ok, inside the body, there
is a soul. And a wise person does not, you know, lament. So, that means, there
is information over there. And there is also an indirect, a, suggestion, and
indirect instruction. That you should also not lament. But that is not direct.
So, certain statements in scriptures are direct instructions. This is what you
should do. So, for example:

        nāsato vidyate bhāvo
        nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ

This is the, of the not, eternal there is no cessation. Or the temporary, there
is no endurance. Now, there is no direct instruction in this. But "tāṁs
titikṣasva bhārata". Therefore, Arjuna, tolerate. This is an instructions. 2.14
is instruction. Similarly, we had 2.18 is "tasmād yudhyasva bhārata" is
instruction. So, you know, instructional statements are most important for
sadhakas. The informational, educational statements, they are also important.
Because they enable us to understand Krishna, to understand the philosophy
better. From the practical point of view, the instruction statements are the
most important. Just like a doctor may give a lot of information about the
disease. Ok, you know, this is, the, that if you have got some lung infection.
So, the pulmonary infection is there. Now, it is, basically, then, he says, ok.
This is the infection is over here. And this may happen in the future. This is
how it is likely to have been caused. This is all this. And the, these are the
different ways in which this infection can affect the body. Now, all this
information is important. But the most important for the, information of the
patient is what should we do? What should I do? Ok, take this medicine morning,
afternoon, evening. When I used to, at, getting cough, do this, this. So, like
that, these are the most practical, more practically relevant and important for
the patient. Similarly, the scriptures give us a lot of instructions. But among,
a lot of, a lot of statements are there in the scriptures, which contain a lot
of information, also. But within that, those statements which are in the mode of
instruction. So, like here, "tasmād yudhyasva bhārata", a call for action
directly. Now, they are especially important. So, now, Krishna continues the
same thought in the next verse by explaining how the body is, once one
understands that one is not the body, then to lament for the instruction of the
person is ignorance.

        ya enaṁ vetti hantāraṁ
        yaś cainaṁ manyate hatam
        ubhau tau na vijānīto
        nāyaṁ hanti na hanyate

So, "ya enaṁ vetti hantāraṁ". So, "enaṁ vetti". One who thinks this to be
"hantāraṁ", the destroyer. "yaś cainaṁ manyate hatam". One who thinks that the
soul is destroyed. "ubhau tau". Both of them. "na vijānīto". Neither of them
actually know. "nāyaṁ hanti na hanyate". The soul neither, a, kills, nor is
killed. So, now, in this verse, it is easy to understand that the soul is not
killed. Krishna has very clearly said that the soul is indestructible. So, now,
what is Krishna meaning here by saying that the soul is not the killer, also?
Obviously, Ar..., K..., that is, Arjuna was going to shoot the arrows. And then,
Arjuna shoots the arrows at his opponents. He is going to be the killer, isn't
he? So, actually, the statement has to be understood in context. The previous
verse was saying that, the body is perishable. So, because the body is
perishable. The body is going to die by its own course. In the course of nature,
the body's destruction cannot be avoided. So, in that sense, when the, when the
soul and the body get separated at death, the point is, that, that sort of
separation was unavoidable. And therefore, if somebody thinks I am the killer.
Then, that is actually the "kartāham iti manyate" mentality. I am the doer. So,
this, we will discuss more when we come to 3.27 in the Bhagavad Gita. And
further, we will discuss about "kartā" in the fifth chapter. So, here, it is not
that anybody can kill anyone, and say, actually, now, I am "hanti na hanyate".
No, I am not the killer. I am not, no one is killed. Because atma is eternal.
No. Actually, Prabhupada will quote in a future verse that "mā hiṁsyāt sarvā
bhūtāni". Actually, "mahim", the scriptures do tell us that do not to
commit violence. So, here, Krishna is talking about, you know, the overall
pattern of material nature that the body is perishable. Its destruction cannot
be avoided. And he is also talking about ksatriya, Arjuna's ksatriya duty. He,
do not flinch from duty. By flinching from his duty, he will not be able to
change the course of nature. By the course of nature, people will have to suffer
and die. And one cannot change that by some adjustment, by some, by some, a,
change. By the reluction of duty, one cannot do that. Therefore, as, by, give up
duty. Krishna continues the further argument by elaborating more on the soul.
Yes. So, this is the next verse which was. So, Prabhupada quotes actually in
this verse only. "mā hiṁsyāt sarvā bhūtāni". This is not a, this verse is not a
categorical license for killing indiscriminately. Not at all. So, Prabhupada
says:

"Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominable and is punishable by
the law of the state as well as by the law of the Lord."

Now:

        na jāyate mriyate vā kadācin
        nāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na bhūyaḥ
        ajo nityaḥ śāśvato ’yaṁ purāṇo
        na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre

This is a well, a frequently quoted verse. Now, there, each of these lines has a
significance. The most important from the context of Arjuna is "na hanyate
hanyamāne śarīre". When the body is destroyed, the soul is not destroyed. The
soul, the part of, the, the soul, the spiritual being, the, a part of Krishna,
the spark of consciousness, that is "na hanyate". So, even when the body is
destroyed, the soul is not destroyed. Now, a, further "na jāyate mriyate vā
kadācin". The soul does not take birth. The soul does not die. What does it mean
"na jāyate mriyate"? Actually, you know, what do we mean by the soul is, is "na
jāyate", it has no birth? And also, the word is used in third line, in 20C, is
"ajo"? "ajo" is unborn. So, unborn and not taking birth. They seem to be
similar. And what is the point when we say? Normally, if we say that, ok, the
child has not yet taken birth. That means we would say the child does not exist,
you know. Or it would mean that a child exists in the womb, but has not taken
birth. So, what is it? What does the soul, what do we mean in the sense by soul,
a, being "ajo"? Actually, the "ajo" refers to the soul not having come into
existence at a particular time. When we say something has come into birth, that
means it had entry into existence at a particular time. And if it has an entry
into existence at a particular time, then it may also have exited a particular
time. So, the soul is just beyond the dimensions of time. The soul is
transcendental. So, "ajo", here, does not mean non-existence, non-existent.
"ajo" essentially means over there it does not come to birth. It, it does not
come within time domain at any time. But it is always eternal. And essentially,
in this whole section, Krishna is using the Upanishadic strategy of naiti,
naiti, naiti, naiti. What is it, naiti strategy? That when the Upanishads and
the philosophical seekers, the jnanis, or those inclined towards
jnana-marga. They not need be celibacy, they can be devotees, also. Who can use
introspection and intellection to analyse. So, na..., naiti process is, naiti,
naiti, naiti. Ok, am I those body? No, I am not the body. You know, the body is
made up of air. Am I the air? No, I am not the air. So, who am I? So, not this.
Not this. Not this. Not this. So, by this process of philosophical negation,
gradually, one comes affirmation. By negation the material, we pave the way,
eventually, for the affirmation of the spiritual. That is the process of
philosophical introspection about our nature. So, Krishna is using here,
basically, the method of negation. So, He is saying "na jāyate". "na mriyate".
"ajaḥ". So, all the attributes that characterise the body. Those do not
characterise the soul. The soul does not take birth. The soul does not die. The
soul is immeasurable. The soul, as we will see in the future verses, is
indivisible, impenetrable. So, basically, all the things that apply to the body,
they do, things do not apply to the soul. So, Krishna is using the method of
naiti, naiti. Not this. Not this. To, to point out, what the soul is,
indirectly. So, because there is a conflation. Conflation means mixing up of the
body and the soul over here. So, that mixing up, Krishna is unmixing,
separating, mi..., by first pointing out that whatever applies to the body does
not apply to the soul. Now, "na jāyate". That soul is, never takes birth.

Now, the concept of soul is there in most religious traditions. However, this
concept is quite m..., m..., quite hazy. You know, for example, in the Abrahamic
religions. Abrahamic religions are Judaism, Christianity and Islam. They talk
about the soul. But when they talk about the soul, their talk is mostly, they,
almost as if, referring to the soul, you know, as, using the soul, soul as a
reference to, as a metaphorical reference to our non-material essence. That
means that, we, there is something essential which survives to us. That is
non-material. And as a metaphorical reference to our non-material essence. So,
the soul does not often taken literally as an entity. Now, of course, in, within,
this apply, Abrahamic religions, also, there are many different denominations.
We all have their own ideas. But prominently, the, there is not much
self-knowledge in these, you know, scriptures. And in the overall tradition,
also. So, the soul, the difference between the soul comes. But it comes more as
a reference to our, as metaphorical reference to our non-material essence. The
Bhagavad Gita and the Vedic literature in the other hand, they treat the soul as
a, an ontological, higher-dimensional entity. Ontological means pertaining to
the nature of existence. Pertaining to reality as it is. So, the soul is a
literal, higher-dimensional entity. There is a thing called a soul. So, of
course, it is not a thing. It is a conscious being. But the point is, we can use
thing to refer to beings, also. It is not just some hazy conception. It is an
actual being. It is an actual, actual object. So, there, the reference to the
soul as a metapho..., as a metaph..., metaphorical, if we can see that you know.
For example, somebody say, love God, love God with all thy heart, all thy might,
and all thy soul. So, now, when we say all thy soul. What are we referring to
over here? You know, now, actually, there is, the heart gets its consciousness
from the soul. The heart gets its emotions from the soul. The body gets energy
from the soul. So, when we say, put your, put your, so, love God with all thy
soul. What is it referring to, actually? Here, the soul is being referred to in
a metaphorical sense. So, put the, your essen..., your entire being, your
essential being. Put it all into you, it. So, or, we may also use this in our
day-to..., our day-to-day languages, devotees, also. So, the metaphoric, the use
of, the ref..., use of the word soul in a metaphorical sense is not wrong. For
example, when we say put your heart and soul in doing service. So, now, what do
we mean over here? Put your heart and soul. So, s..., first of all, when we use
the word, the heart itself, we are referring to, metaphorically. Metaphorically
means, it is not that I have to take my heart out of my chest. And put it in the
service. You know. No. The, here, when we refer to the heart, we are not
referring to the biological heart that beats and circulates blood all over the
c..., body. We are referring to the metaphorical heart which is the seat of all
emotions. So, put your heart in doing service means that put all your emotions.
You know, do the service with your emotions. As Krishna will say:

        ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
        mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate
        iti matvā bhajante māṁ
        budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

"budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ". With emotions. That is 10.8. And similarly, in 15.19,
He says:

        yo mām evam asammūḍho
        jānāti puruṣottamam
        sa sarva-vid bhajati māṁ
        sarva-bhāvena bhārata

"sarva-bhāvena". With all emotions. So, the heart refers to the seat of
emotions. Metaphorically. Not the ph..., biological heart. Similarly, when we
say put your heart and soul in doing service. The soul also refers to, m...,
metaphorically as the seat of consciousness. So, put your consciousness into it.
Put your essential being into it. Put your everything into it. So, we may also
use the soul, the word soul sometimes in a metaphorical sense. So, for example,
when we say, I, I put my soul, you know, I put my soul into that project. So,
now, what does it mean? It is not that there was some project over there. I took
the soul out of the body and put it over there. So, here, so, sometimes, as
devotees, also, we may use the word my soul. Now, philosophical point is b..., I
am not the body. I am the soul. That is correct. But there are times, there are
occasions when we can also use my soul. The reference to my soul we can use.
Because the, you know, it is a co..., conventional usage. And it is our
essential being, or our entire being. We can, when we put so..., something in,
put into something. We can say I put my soul into that. So, that is with respect
to the general understanding of the soul, concept of soul in various traditions.
Now, you know, we discussed earlier how the broad religious traditions in the
world can be classified into two. There is the Abrahamic religions. And there
are dharmic religions. The Abrahamic religions, Judaism, Christianity, Islam,
they are often history-centered. You know, there are some specific event that
happened in history and centered on it. For example, Moses taking the selected
people from Egypt to, you know, the Promised Land, Jerusalem. Or Jesus'
appearance and his resurrection. Or Muhammad's coming. They are
history-centered. Where the dharmic religions are, say, Buddhism, Jainism,
Hinduism, Sikhism. They focus more on, that they also, historical events are
there. And they are significant. But they are, more search for the principles of
dharma. Understanding the universal principles that underlie the Universe. And
harmonising with those principles. That is the focus of the dharmic religions.
So, now, in the dharmic religions, if you see, Buddhism has a peculiar
conception. Their concept is, there is reincarnation. But there is no soul. So,
in a sense, if you consider that Christianity accepts soul, but does not accept
reincarnation. They consider there is only one life. We will discuss that a
little bit later. Whereas, you know, Buddhism accepts reincarnation without
soul. Now, we wonder, if there is reincarnation, what reincarnates? You know,
what is it? There has to be something which goes from body to another. So,
actually, now, they say. No. No. No. Actually, you know, there is no such thing
which goes from one body to another. Because there is no such thing existing
right now, also. So, they say what our sense of "I"ness is just a residue of the
flow of consciousness. So, the flow of consciousness is, keeps moving. And
because the flow of consciousness keeps moving. You know, just, so, that, just
as it moves in this life. So, they say that there is not even a soul, right now.
So, it is just, just stream of consciousness that is moving forward. And that
stream of consciousness continues to exist in the next life, also. So, they
ha..., accept reincarnation without soul.

Now, what is it that reincarnates? That is a question that has stymied Buddhist
thinkers for millenia, now. But essentially, their idea is, you know, the soul
i..., there is no such thing as soul. Anatta-vada, their philosophy is called
as.  Now, there is, there is amongst Buddhist scholars, also, a debate where
Buddha had actually taught like this. The Buddha, because he rejected the Vedic
scriptures at that time. We had discussed earlier how because at that time, meat
eating was very prominent. So, to stop people from meat-eating, he said, cannot
you see that there are so many animals are being killed? How can you allow
meat-eating like this? So, stop meat-eating. He says, but the Vedas say this, he
says, forget the Vedas. So, what was the idea? Reject the Vedas. Because people
had misunderstood the Vedas. And they were, they had, you know, they had
shattered down. Shat..., reduced the broad promo..., Vedic program to a small
narrow program of, you know, material gratification with the justification of
the Vedas. So, he said, reject the Vedas. Now, without the Vedas, it is very
difficult to know anything about the Absolute Truth, very clearly. That is why
when Buddha taught, his teaching was very eminently practical. He did not go
into metaphysics much. So, for example, at one time, some person came and asked
him. He says, are you a God? He said, no. Are you an angel? No. He says, are you
the Supreme? No. He says, you know, like that, he asked. That person was trying
to understand Buddha's identity. Who are you? So, he said, I am awake. I am
awake. That was all that he said. Another time, somebody asked him. Is the soul
different from the body or same as the body? So, is the soul same as the body?
He remained silent. Is the soul different from the body? He remained silent. And
then, finally that person got exasperated and went away. And one of his
prominent disciples, Ānanda had asked him that, you know, why did you not answer
the question? He said, that person was asking questions based on the platform of
ignorance. So, either way, whatever I would speak, that would only reenforce the
ignorance. So, therefore, I decided not to do, answer. So, Buddha mostly avoided
metaphysical que..., answers, metaphysical issues. He focused on morality. So,
Buddhism is basically like a, it is Sattvik culture. That was he tried to do.
Right thought. Right averse. Right action. So, try to bring people to goodness
so that eventually, they can receive Vedic wisdom and attain transcendence. So,
it is, in that sense, a pretheistic religion, pretheistic. So, some people think
that Buddha is an atheistic. But the athe..., explicit atheistic rejection of
God was not taught by Buddha. Buddha did not take rejection of God. He just
taught do not talk about God. Focus on morality. Focus on practical action for
improving your behavior. And he neglected, he just neglected ph..., metaphysical
issues. But subsequent thinkers, you know, in the Buddhist tradition, they
im..., imported a lot of concepts which were originally not there in the
teachings of Buddha. So, one, one of them was atheism. And another of them was
the rejection of the soul. So, Buddhism emerged from Hinduism. Of course, the
word Hindu was not there at that time. But the Vedic tradtion that was there,
Buddhism emerged as a rebel tradition. Which rejected the discriminatory caste
system. Which rejected Vedic authority. And established itself as an independent
body of thought. Now, in the q..., in their quest to establish philosophical
autonomy. Philosophical autonomy means, yes, we have a distinct philosophy. We
are not just an offshoot of Hinduism. So, they tried to come up with various
ideas. And one of the ideas that they came up, many of the Buddhist thinkers,
was this Anatta-vada. That there is no soul at all. So, essent..., Hindus
believe in a soul. We do not believe in a soul. So, that is how they tried to
divorce themselves from Hinduism in a philosophical way, also.

Culturally, in some ways, it was a rebellion ag..., against Hinduism. That they
rejected the caste system, rejected Vedic authority. And philosophically, they
came up with this idea. So, it is a very unsustainable idea. Now, for example,
they gave, they give the example that m..., now, when we see a flame, a candle.
To our vision, the candle's flame remains the s..., same. But actually, there is
no same candle's flame. The candle's flame is constantly changing, changing,
changing, changing, changing. So, you know, the candle's flame is just changing,
changing, changing. And when the candle is about to get extinguished. At that
time, this candle's flame is transformed to another candle's flame. And then,
also, the candle's flame keeps changing, changing, changing, changing. So, just
as the flame a..., you know, is constantly changing, but appears to be the same.
Similarly, our consciousness a..., appears to have a continuity, but it keeps
changing constantly. So, however, saying this is a misunderstanding, this, a
misapplied example. The Bhagavatam gives this example, f..., also, in the
Eleventh Canto. And it gives the example to de..., demonstrate, to drive home
the point that we are, you know, different from the material world. And the
material world and every..., in the, in the material world, everything is
changing. So, now, I see this ball. I see this table as continuous. But
actually, things are constantly changing, changing, changing, changing,
changing. So, we, if we look at a microscopic level, matter is always in state
of flux. There is energy being, matter is being created. Matter is being
destroyed. So, at the material level, everything is constantly changing.
Material things are changing. And that is a fact. So, there is change. But there
is an illusion of continuity because of persistence of vision. Just like when a
person is moving a, say, a lighted candle, or lighted torch, moves it round, and
round, and round, at a half, fast speed. Then, it appears to arise as if there
is a circle. Why? Because our eyes, whatever if we see, a few moments ago, that
persists in our vision. And because of that persistence of vision, what we have
seen earlier continues to stay there in the eyes. And that is how we perceive
things. But, you know, pursue that as a circle of fire, not just one flame, one
torch of fire. So, similarly, because of persistence of vision, we see, you
know, this material world as continuous. This is what Bhagavatam also says. But
the important point is, taking one step backward, is that there is a continuous
observer, who sees things as continuous. So, similarly, yes, when we talk about
the soul, the mind and the body. So, the soul's consciousness, when it continues
31:08
