Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZEHQAfVs-0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_042_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Introduction_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=izxlAjxZnFeKnHr-q9Xy_7rPtZt8MTU0ODQ4NjkxNkAxNTQ4NDAwNTE2&event=video_description&v=iZEHQAfVs-0

Hare Krishna.

So, today, we start with the Bhagavad Gita as a part of a Bhakti Shastri course.
So, we will start with a prayer which refers to Lord Krishna as the s...,
speaker of the Bhagavad Gita. And every class will start with this prayer.

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

"sarathyam arjunasyadau", the, the Lord became the "sarathyam" of Arjuna. And
after that, in the beginning, he did that. "kurvan gitamrtam dadau". He gave the
nectar of the Gita. For what purpose? "loka-trayopakaraya", for the sake of the
benefit of all the three worlds. "tasmai krsnatmane namah", unto that Krishna,
who is a soul of all existence. Krishna says "mamatma bhuta bhavana". He says
actually He is a soul of all existence. "krsnatmane namah", unto that Lord
Krishna, I offer obeisances.

So, today, I discuss briefly with the introduction and the preface, we will not
be able to go fully into details of that. But we will just look at a topic wise
overview, to be able to understand in what mood Srila Prabhupada is presenting
the Bhagavad Gita. And in that, I will also talk about the setting of the
Bhagavad Gita, the background, its importance in terms of the overall Vedic
context. And then, we will start with the Bhagavad Gita after that. So, in the
book, there is, in Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita as it is, there is a preface. And
there is an introduction. So, generally, when books start off, there can be
various things that come before the book, which are also written. But there can
be a prologue. Prologue generally comes in a novel or a story where some part of
the event is told beforehand. Some part of the story line is told beforehand. Or
something which sets up the sc..., scene, is told beforehand. So, here, we have
setting the scene. That gives an introduction which is not written by the
author. But which is written by the publishers. And then the, along with that,
there can sometimes be a foreword, So, if a foreword is there, the foreword is
normally written by somebody other than the author. So, setting the scene can be
written by the author sometimes. But generally, foreword means, that, some other
person is writing the word in the beginning. Fore is beginning. So, the idea of
a foreword is, that somebody whom the author, so, whom the author is connected
with well, or somebody who respects the author, and somebody whom the audience
respects. So, the foreword is a bridge between the author and the audience. So,
these, sort of the, in the foreword, the author is introducing the author to the
audience and telling about the book to the audience. So, apart from that, there
is an introduction. So, normally, if we have a class, then we often have the
introduction of the preacher. So, that introduction of the speaker is like the
foreword of a book. So, that introduction, normally, normally speaking, people
do not introduce themselves. Somebody else introduces that person. So, like
that, in the foreword, is basically introduction of the author and introduction
of the book also. So, in Srila Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita, at, as it is, we have
a setting the scene, which describes, which is written by the publishers, which
describes how Srila Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita is important, and basically
describes the background. You know, this was written especially for a western
audience. Because in the west, Bhagavad Gita at that time was not so familiar.
And suddenly what happened in the battlefield, that is what the book starts
with, it seems a little odd. So, the setting the scene basically gives the
historical context of the Bhagavad Gita how there is a war between the two
dynasties or the two branches of the Kuru dynasty. And how that came to a head
at Kuruksetra and just before the war is about to start, the battle took place.
So, the hystorical background is given setting the scene.

Now, introduction, is something which Srila Prabhupada wrote with the book. And
preface is something which Srila Prabhupada wrote just before he published the
book. So, in a sense, both are introductions. But the introduction is much more
directly focused on the content of the book. And the preface is focused much
more on the historical context or the audience for which the book is written.
So, the preface is something which Srila Prabhupada's, has written and it is
shorter, much shorter than the book at, than the introduction. So, I will talk
just two-three points from the preface, and then I will go the introduction
which is quite long. And we will try to have an overview of the introduction.
So, through both the preface and the introduction, Srila Prabhupada is
preparing the audience, of, by getting them into the right mood to understand
the Bhagavad Gita to understand the Bhagavad Gita as it is. But Srila Prabhupada
called as Bhagavad Gita as it is, not just Bhagavad Gita, but Bhagavad Gita as
it is. Because several people had commented in, in Prabhupada, in incorrect
ways. And Srila Prabhupada wanted Krishna's message as it is originally intended
to be presented to the people. And that is what he tries to do in his
presentation of the Bhagavad Gita. So, let us look at the preface first. So, in
the preface, we have, so there is setting the scene, there is dedicated, there
is preface. So, in the preface, we will see that Srila Prabhupada is describing
the background in which the book was written. And that background is also quite
adventurous. You know, so Prabhupada is writing, originally the book was written
in the pres..., form that I was presented. So, this Srila Prabhu..., this
preface was not there in the first publication of the book. So, it is, the
book's story of how Bhagavad Gita was written is also very interesting. Srila
Prabhupada was in India, and 1965, he left India. Before that, in the previous
three years, he published one-one volume of the Bhagavatam. Actually, it was the
first Canto produced in three volumes. You know, when he had the first Canto
translations ready, translation, commentary is ready, then he felt himself
equipped, just for going to be transcendental ammunition to low power the
delusion in the minds of people, the affects of mode passion, ignorance. Now,
when Srila Prabhupada went to America, he got followers after a lot of struggle,
but from 1966 onward, he started getting followers. But he was in a peculiar
pro..., situation there in the sense that in India, he was a published author
and he had respected author his book with Bhagavatam volumes had been sent to
government libraries. He had given a copy to the prime minister of India, to the
president of India, and to many respectable people. And they had even written
positive sta..., positive statements about the book. But in America, he was
relatively unknown. And his disciples were all relatively uninfluential and
unconnected. They were mostly hippies who had a lot of sincerity. But they did
not have any material contacts and not so much material competence also. So,
Srila Prabhupada sta..., started asking them to do, you know, the back to
Godhead, which he had started earlier and he stopped to start focusing on his
books. But then he wanted his books published. Even when he was in America, he
would, very diligently, make time, especially in the early morning hours to
write his commentaries. So, when he was writing in this way, just there was no
way the book was working out. Who, these devotees had, disciples had no idea how
they will publish the book. They went to some publishers, but, now, the American
publishers had no reach in India. And because Srila Prabhupada was not a very
famous swami at that time, the American publishers were thinking that, who will,
who will take such a book and how will we distribute it? So, the prospects were
not very bright. So, Brahmananda Prabhu, Hayagriva Prabhu, all of them were
trying to find out some way, and one day, you know, the devotees got a letter
from Macmillan. Macmillan was one of the biggest publishers at that time. Even
now, it is quite respected. So, when they said that, we, please come to our
office, we are interested in the books. So, it was Macmillan that devotees went
there. That devotees went very enthusiastically there, and there, disappointment
awaited them. They found that there was only one clerk in Macmillan's office who
wanted a Bhagavad Gita for himself. And they were so disappointed. They already
told Prabhupada how excited they were, so what will they tell Prabhupada. But as
the clerk was talking with the devotee who had come to give him copy of the book
also, suddenly, the clerk became tense, and he became very respectful. And then,
this other person walking behind, and he says that is the chief officer, as
like, that is our boss, you know, the biggest person in Macmillan. So, that
person just walked away into his office. And Brahmananda Prabhu was thinking,
can I somehow get to meet him? So, as he was thinking about it, can I meet him?
No, he is very busy. It takes a long time to get an appointment. At that time,
suddenly, their office, that person, he came out. He says, are, are you
connected with some swami? He said yes. He said, I am a disciple of
Bhaktivedanta Swami. And he said in a lower voice, a real swami? He says yes,
yes. You know, we are making a collection of books on rela..., on the scriptures
of the world. So, we have a, we have a boon on the Bi..., we have published a
Bible. We have published a Quran. We have published for various religions, but
we do not have anything on the hinduism. So, we want the Bhagavad Gita. Has your
swami written anything on the Bhagavad Gita? He says yes. I got the book. Oh,
full commentary on the Bhagavad Gita? He says yes. So, he says, so excited, so,
ok, come and show it to me. And they showed it. So, normally, if a publisher has
to publish, they go through a long editorial process, the publisher may say do
this, do that. But they said that, ok, if you got it, then, they, actually, it
went through it quite fast. But they saw one thing. He says we got a standard
length for all our books. That is something like four hundred, five hundred
pages. And they said that your swami's commentaries are too big. So, tell him
to cut the commentaries and make the book to our prespecified length. So, then,
then, Hayagriva Prabhu writes in his Hare Krishna Explosion that he had the
doleful task of deciding which of Srila Prabhupada's purports were unnecessary.
So, somehow, he did that. And then Macmillan published the book. So, after
Macmillan published the book, Prabhu..., the, the devotees were very happy.
So, Prabhupada also got a lot of respectability by that. And at that time, the
foreword was written by Allen Ginsberg, and G..., Al..., who was a famous hippie
musician. You could say famous or infamous, but he appreciated Srila Prabhupada.
And there were two other people also who wrote book, relatively well-known, who
also wrote forewords. And then the book was published.

Now, when the book was published, it, it got positive reuse from many people,
many scholars also, and when the book's demand has big, book was wanted more and
more. And then Prabhupada felt that now that he had got the first breakthrough,
he decided that rather than getting the book published through Macmillan, he
decided that as it is they had cut down on the purports and much of what he had
given was not there, so Prabhupada decided to start his own publishing house,
you know, which at that time was called ISKCON Press. Later on, that was renamed
as Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. So, through ISKCON Press, then he published the
full Bhagavad Gita as it is. And that full Bhagavad Gita as it is had all the
purports. So, that is why Srila Prabhupada is writing that:

"When this book was first published, the original manuscript was, unfortunately,
cut short to less than 400 pages, without illustrations and without explanations
for most of the original verses..."

So, that had happened because, that had happened because, you know, Macmillan
hinted a particular length that they wanted the books to be. So, Srila
Prabhupada has, so this preface is not there in the Macmillan published Bhagavad
Gita. It was there in the ISKCON Press published, subsequently were published by
Prabhupada, by Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. And that is how it has been published.
So, 12:38
