Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2S4rA2Jnlh0
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=2S4rA2Jnlh0&redir_token=Aw57OT9wPmmQnHDPti3wnrHfOQh8MTU0ODQ4NzkzNkAxNTQ4NDAxNTM2&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_072_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_04_Text_24_to_33_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri, Bhagavad Gita course. We are
not discussing the Fourth Chapter. We will now discuss about "yajñāyācarataḥ".
In 4.23, we discussed, you know, about Krishna telling Arjuna to act in the mood
of "yajñā". Now, generally, people think of "yajñā" as fire sacrifice. So, we
discussed in 3.9 that "yajñā" is not just an, you know, activity. It is also a
principle. The principle is of sacrifice. The one specific form where, sacrifice
may be through fire. Through the, you know, is Agni Deva who is manifesting as
the fire. Who accepts the offerings that we make. But the essential point is
sacrifice. And actually even the word sacrifice is related in, in English
etymology to the, to sacralise. To sacred. So, sac..., when we sacrifice
something, it is the idea that we are doing something sacred. We are making it
sacred. So, th..., originally the idea of the word sacrifice was related with
the word, you know, sacred. So, Krishna will first give us a very broad vision
of what sacrifice means. And then, He will give specific ways in which Arjuna
can perform sacrifices. So, let us look at the verse. 4.24.

        brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir
        brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam
        brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ
        brahma-karma-samādhinā

So, the word "brahma" comes so many times over here. That it might lead to some
confusion. N..., now, the word "brahma", if you see, it comes six times. Two
times in A and B of 4.24 and once in C and D. So, what is Krishna telling over
here? Actually, if we look at the other perjure. "āgnau". "havir". "hutam".
"arpaṇam". So, what these are referring to the components of a sacrifice. So,
"arpaṇam" is that which is offered. M..., the of contribution. "brahmārpaṇaṁ".
So, "arpit karma". To contribute. To give. "brahmārpaṇaṁ". So, what is being
contributed is brahman. "brahma havir". So, "havir" is butter. So, butter is
like the, you know, you know, the fuel in a sense that is used to make sure the
sacrifice grows. So, butter itself can also be called a sacrifice. But along
with that, there are grains and other things, which are sacrifices. Butter is
like the main thing that is added to the fire. So, in that sense, it is separate
over here. "brahma havir". And then, "brahma", "agnau". The fire itself.
"āgnau". That is also brahma. That is also spirit. So, now, brahma here does not
necessarily refer to brahmajyoti. Brahma is used, a generic word used to refer
to spiritual. That is also spiritual. "brahmaṇā hutam". So, "hutam" is the
offered. So, the per..., the o..., person doing the offering, you know, brahma.
So:

        brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir
        brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam

You know, so, the person doing offering is also spiritual. And then, "brahmaiva
tena gantavyaṁ". "gantavyaṁ" is destination. So, the destination that is
attained is also brahma. And that person, what is the person doing? Krishna was
talking in the previous verses about how one should do karma. So, He is saying,
this person is doing "brahma-karma". That person is doing spiritual work. And
the person is in "samādhinā" is absorbed in "samādhi". So, what is this verse
telling? That when one acts in the spirit of "yajñā". Then, all of existence
becomes like a sacrifice. Once one understands that ultimately, it is, you know,
Krishna's energy that is present everywhere. And that that Krishna's energy is
all-encompassing. Krishna's energy is there for everyone to use for whatever
purposes they want. But it is ultimately Krishna's energy. They can use it for
Krishna's service. They can use it for sense gratification. Whatever they use it
for, it is ultimately Krishna's energy. So, when once we understand this. Then,
you know, and we s..., decide to use it for Krishna's service. We decide to use
it for spiritual purposes in general. Then, everything can become, you know,
spiritually vis..., understood. So, let us look at this specific example to
understand what we mean by spiritually understood. So, we were, discussed this
earlier briefly. Things that are material and spiritual. We can talk about them
in two ways. In a compositional sense. And in an applicational sense.
Compositional means what is material and what is spiritual, it depends on what
it is made of. So, you know, something is made up of sat-cit-ananda, that is
spiritual. Something is made of jala tattva. Like earth, water, fire, air,
ether. Then, that is material. That is from the compositional point of what it
is made up of. But there is also an applicational sense. What is it used for?
So, prasad may be made of material elements. But because it is used for
Krishna's service. So, it is spiritual. So, you know, spiritual means, it is
used for spiritual purposes. So, things can be spiritualised by being used for
spiritual purposes. So, that is the applicational sense of the word spiritual.
So, when we say, the spiritual master's body is spiritual. What does it mean?
That means it is used for spiritual purposes. The spiritual master's body, you
know, may also grow old. It may also get diseases. But that does not
necessarily, that does not make it, you know, you know, you know, materialistic
in the way the mate..., ordinary people's ma..., body is materialistic. Because
the peo..., spiritual master's body is basically used for Krishna's service. So,
because it is being used for Krishna's service, so it leads to spiritual, you
know, you know, it is spiritualised for all practices. Prabhupada says, there
can be a golden box. And there is a gold-plated box. So, you know, that which
sat-cit-ananda is like the golden box. So, that which is spiritualised is like
gold-plated. But essentially, both are actually gold. So, like that, the
spiritual master's, you know, you know, you know, body or other things like
that, which can be spiritualised by the practice of, by culti..., by the
cultivation, by the practice of Krishna Consciousness, of engagement in
devotional service. So, now, let us look at the, what the verse means. So,
Krishna is, is Chakra..., so, Chakravarti Pada, our acharya explained over here.

That re-envision the battlefield as "yajñā". So, here, Arjuna is telling, K...,
a, Krishna, ok, if you want, perform "yajñā". So, Arjuna may get a question
here. That Krishna, if you want me to perform "yajñā". "yajñāyācarataḥ karma".
Then, you know, why am I here on battlefield? This is not a "yajñā". Let me go
to the forest. And there, we will do "yajñā", nicely. You know, we will call
some s..., priests. And we will all do "yajñā" properly. I will, I will do, you
know, I will, I will do "yajñā". I will become a yajamana for doing "yajñā". He
says, now, He says no. Krishna is, you know, acharayas are saying that Krishna
is implying this itself is a "yajñā". So, what is the "yajñā" over here? The
battlefield is your yajna-sthali. And yajna-sthali is the place where "yajñā" is
performed. Then, you have to perform. You have to have a ladle or a spoon for
making the offerings. So, we take things in a spoon. And offer it. So, that
ladle or spoon is the, your Gāṇḍīva bow. And ahuti, who, what is the ahuti that
is to be offered? We offer ghee, or some of the items. So, this ahuti is rais...,
offered to the Kauravas. And who is going to a..., accept the offering? What is
the sacrifical fire? That is the virata-rupa. So, we will discuss in the
Eleventh Chapter how the offering that is being made. Or the virata-rupa will be
devouring everything. So, the warriors, the, so:

        daṁṣṭrā-karālāni ca te mukhāni

You know, "niṣṭrā". So, some:

        daṁṣṭrā-karālāni ca te mukhāni

Your mouth is filled with fearsome teeth. And:

        cūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ

They are entering. And then, they are getting, a, shattered. All the warriors.

        dhṛtarāṣṭran

So, all the sons of Dhṛ..., Dhṛtarāṣṭra. So, the point is, the s..., uni...,
virata-rupa, when it is devouring, it is actually showing how the offering that
is being made is being accepted. So, Krishna is telling Arjuna, "yajñā" is not
just one specific, you know, religious activity. It is the principle. So, if you
are acting for, in the principle of sacrifice, and for the pleasure of the
Absolute Truth. Then, even a battlefield can be a "yajñā". So, this verse
basically says, whatever we are doing, that can become a "yajñā". So, right now,
we are discussing Krishna Katha. So:

        brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir
        brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam

So, actually, the sound vibration, all of us are doing sacrifice. What is the
sacrifice that we are doing? We are offering our conciousness. So, Krishna is
manifesting as a sound. And we are offering our consciousness to Krishna. You
know, by speaking and hearing. And as we do like this, we speak. And hear. And
offer our consciousness to Krishna. "brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir". So, everything
becomes spiritualised over there. And when we become spiritualised, then
"brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ". We experience advancement. Ultimately, we attain
brahman. We attain the spiritual platform by hearing sound vibration regularly.
"brahma-karma-samādhinā". So, we, because we were actually doing "brahma-karma".
We are doing spiritual activity. So, here, Krishna is telling that let us fix
our mind on, you know, the spirituali..., the spiritual element that underlies
everything. And by use..., com..., spiritualising our consciousness, we can
actually, you know, re-envision everything. Re-envision is not just a, a f...,
sen..., sentimental fantasy or intellectual conceptualisation. It is actually an
insight into the true nature of things. That is what we will get by such
thinking. By such, by the vision that Gita is providing us. Srila Prabhupada's
purport is quite significant. Let us look at some points in, m..., so,
Prabhupada e..., he say that, the Lo..., now, Prabhupada explains the word, oh,
"brahman", how everything is ultimately brahman.

"The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of His transcendental body are called
brahma-jyotir, His spiritual effulgence. Everything that exists is situated in
that brahma-jyotir, but when the jyotir is covered by illusion (māyā) or sense
gratiﬁcation, it is called material. This material veil can be removed at once
by Kṛṣṇa consciousness;"

So, Pra..., now, he says, so, then, he says that, when the jyotir is covered by
illusion or sense gratiﬁcation, it is called material. What does that mean?
Ultimately, Prabhupada is talking it from the applicational point of view. It,
e..., everything coming from Krishna, we can say, in one sense is spiritual.
Because it is coming from Krishna. But when it is covered by illusion, we think
that it is meant for not s..., Kr..., Kr..., not Kr..., Krishna's service. We
think that it is meant for sense gratification. And when we think that it is
meant for sense gratification, then we become entangled. So, if we want to avoid
such entanglement, then we have to develop the right vision. So, Prabhupada
explains that everything becomes spiritualised when it has the right
consciousness. So, now, let us, now, Krishna will describe different kinds of
"yajñā"s. So, let us look at what these kinds of "yajñā"s are. So, here, there
is literal sac...., sacrifice. Which is nishkama-karma-yoga. Then, there is
worship of devatas. sa-kama-karma-yoga. This is 4.25A and B. Then, offering atma
to brahman. That is jnana-yoga. That is 4.25C, D. So, we will come back to the
list as we move forward. Let us look at the elements one by one. Literal
sacrifice means or nishkama-karma-yoga means actually, the nishkama-karma-yogis,
when they are living in the world, they also perform sacrifice. They also do
"yajñā"s. So, let us look at this 4.25 now:

        daivam evāpare yajñaṁ
        yoginaḥ paryupāsate
        brahmāgnāv apare yajñaṁ
        yajñenaivopajuhvati

So, "daivam evāpare yajñaṁ". So, "daivam" means unto the devatas. "āpare" is
some people. "yajñaṁ". Some people, you know, they perform the "yajñā". "yoginaḥ
paryupāsate". And even those are yogis. Those are worshipping, you know, the
devatas. They are also, at one level, connected with Krishna. They may not be
connected with Krishna at a very high level. They may not connected with S...,
Absolute Truth at a high level. But they are acknowledging there is some higher
reality. So, they are connected. "yoginaḥ paryupāsate". And then, "brahmāgnāv
apare yajñaṁ". So, "apare yajñaṁ" means there are others who perform "yajñā" of
"brahmā", "yajñenaivopajuhvati". "upajuhvati". So, the, what do they offer? They
offer, in one sense, themselves. They offer the soul into the brahman. So, what
does this mean offering themselves into "upajuhvati". That means they
conceptualise that the Brahman is the Absolute Truth. And I, I have to merge
into it. That is also kind of sacrifice. They want to offer themselves. So, the
point is there are different kinds of sacrifices. So, here, Krishna is giving a
vision of how various religious activities which people may perform within the,
you know, broad Vedic culture, they are all various forms of "yajñā". Now, of
course, after describing these various forms of "yajñā". Krishna will describe
their purpose. And then, He will recommend to Arjuna what you should do. You
know, the point is, Krishna is describing here different kinds of "yajñā". So,
you know, hmm, Prabhupada t..., talks about here "bahv-īśvara-vādī".

"Those who are interested in material beneﬁts worship the demigods by various
sacriﬁces according to the Vedic rituals. They are called bahv-īśvara-vādī, or
believers in many gods."

So, how can somebody be a "bahv-īśvara-vādī"? Now, "polytheism" is the idea that
there are many gods. Theism is belief in God. Monotheism is belief in one God.
Polytheism is belief in many gods. Pantheism is the belief that there are,
there, everything is God. So, henotheism is the belief that there is one
Absolute Truth which manifests in many forms. So, you know, actually, there are
many versions of this. So, here, the "bahv-īśvara-vādī" are the polytheists. You
know, so, polytheism always faces a l..., sim..., m..., fun..., f..., an
unsolvable logical problem how can someone believe in a, m..., there being many
supremes? You know, if we say God. The word God generally connotes supreme. How
can there be one supreme? So, then, the possibility is that, ok, there are
multiple possibilities. There are different departments. And there are different
gods in charge of different departments. And is there one supreme beyond that?
That is the Vedic understanding. These are like the departments. And they are
the cabinet ministers in the universal government. And above that, there is a
Supreme God. So, this is the correct understanding. There are many gods. But
they are all assistants of the one Supreme God. So, is the Vedic philosophy
polytheistic or many..., monotheistic? It is actually monotheistic. But it is,
it is multilevel monotheism. That there are many gods. In the Christian
tradition, in the Islamic tradition, in the Abrahamic traditions, generally,
their idea was the true God. And false gods. That means they have the idea that
false god means these are gods which do not exist, only. They have been created
by the imagination of people. So, that is why they have the idea that, you know,
ok, wherever they will conquer some territory. If we look at the history of
these religions. They will destroy the forms of worship over there. And they say
that, the false god has to be rejected. So that the true God can be established.
Vedic understanding is not that way. The what, they do not consider as false
gods. They are subordinate gods. And there is one supreme God. And the
subordinate gods are assistants of the Supreme God. So, it is multilevel
monotheism. Now, you know, here, Krishna is talking about how different people,
peop..., perform different "yajñā"s. Now, after describing this
"bahv-īśvara-vādī" and the "brahma-vādī", Krishna moves forward and discuss
another kind of "yajñā".

        śrotrādīnīndriyāṇy anye
        saṁyamāgniṣu juhvati
        śabdādīn viṣayān anya
        indriyāgniṣu juhvati

So, "śrotrādīnīndriyāṇy anye". "anye" is some other people. Previously, the word
was used "apare". Here is "anye". It means the same thing more or less. So,
there are other people who, what is the "yajñā" that they do? "juhvati". They
offer what? "juhvati" means offer. So, they offer, you know, the hearing process
in "saṁyamā". That means, what, are, they do is, they use their ears and turn
them inwards. And offer them to the, a, mind. So, they offer their, the hearing
process in the fire of mental control, of self-restraint. That means that
actually, the ea..., so, essential principle of sacrifice is that, what c...,
could be used for our pleasure, we use it for offering to Krishna for his
pleasure. And then we use a, whatever comes, whatever remains from it for our
pleasure. If the, a, we will get pleasure, higher spiritual, but comes, comes
by connecting with Krishna. So, the ears, we can use it to hear so many things.
We can hear m..., a, movie music. We can hear, a, different kinds of song
vibrations. And they may give us some pleasure. But what we do is, we turn the
ears inwards and offer them in the fire of mental restraint. That means we do
not hear about mundane subjects. You know, so, we he..., we turn and, you know,
when we offer the ears in the hear, in the fire of mental control means we use
the mind to control what all we will hear. We do not expose ourselves to
material sound vibrations. We focus on hearing spiritual sound vibrations. So,
this, so, this is, Prabhupada explains is what the brahmacaris do. The
unadulterated brahmacaris, Prabhupada says. What do they do? They turn their
senses inwards. The eyes can look at beautiful things. But they turn the eyes.
And they turn them inwards. That means, they do not, what were, might give the
eyes pleasure. They do not ge..., ing..., indulge in those activities. They use
the acti..., eyes for spiritual purposes. So, this is one level of "yajñā". When
we take the senses and offer them into the mind. And then, the, Krishna says,
other part is, "śabdādīn viṣayān anya", other people, what do they do is,
"viṣayān". "viṣayān" is sense object. "śab...". And the exa..., gives the
example of "śabdā". "śabdā" is sound vibration. So, that is correlated with what
was earlier talked about. "śrotrā". "śrotrā" is ears. So, "indriyāgniṣu
juhvati". And they offer it into the senses. What does this mean? This means
that, actually, when a person, you know, is a regulated householder. At that
time, there is contact with the senses and sense objects. But that contact is
not unrestrained. That contact is not irreligious. That contact is also based on
the principle of sacrifice. So, when the senses are offered in the sense
objects. Sense objects are offered into the senses. Then, when that is done
within the precincts of dharma, then that is actually a, not irreligious. We
will see in the Seventh Chapter. Krishna will tell.

        dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu
        kāmo ’smi bharatarṣabha

When there is, you know, there is sex life. That is not contrary to religious
principles. Then, that is actually Krishna manifesting Himself. So, these
peop..., the regulated householder performs "yajñā" by offering the senses,
sense objects and senses in a regulated way. That means that there is sacrifice
involved there, also. Modern sacrifice is, afterwise is regulation. Whatever
could be done in an unregulated way, when it is done in a regulated way. That is
sacrifice. And by that, people become purified. So, Prabhupada writes in the
purport that there are four varnas. And, so:

"brahmacārī hears only words concerning Kṛṣṇa consciousness; hearing is the
basic principle for understanding, and therefore the pure brahmacārī engages
fully in harer nāmānukīrtanam – chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. He
restrains himself from the vibrations of material sounds,"

And here, Prabhupada quotes from the Bhagavatam. This is a paraphrase of the
verse.

"Sex life, intoxication and meat-eating are general tendencies of human society,
but a regulated householder does not indulge in unrestricted sex life and other
sense gratiﬁcation."

This way, this is also a kind of "yajñā". Now, Krishna will describe another
kind of "yajñā" here. So:

        sarvāṇīndriya-karmāṇi
        prāṇa-karmāṇi cāpare
        ātma-saṁyama-yogāgnau
        juhvati jñāna-dīpite

So, here, now, Krishna is describing another kind of "yajñā". So, what has it,
what we have seen? We have seen worship of devatas. Then, we have seen, you
know, the, jñā..., sa-kama-karma-kanda..., karma-yoga. Then, again,
"jñāna-yoga". naishthiki-brahmacari. Then, is grihastha brahmacaris. Why the
word grihastha-brahmacaris? Because they are regulated. They are also l...,
doing, living in brahman because of the regulation that they are practicing.
Now, Krishna will talk about jñāna-yoga. Then, He will talk about other kinds of
yoga. Let us look at "jñāna-yoga" now. What He says. "sarvāṇīndriya-karmāṇi".
So, the karmā of all the "īndriya"s, all the senses, that, what is done? That is
offered. And also uses the word, "prāṇa-karmāṇi". The activities of "prāṇa".
"prāṇa-maya". So, this is referring to in "prāṇāyāma". What happens? The
breathing is regulated. Breathing becomes disciplined. And the idea is to turn
the breathing also inwards. To, to use the breathing, to regu..., use
regulations of the breathing as a means to turn the consciousness inwards. And then,
in yoga, there is a stage, in the process of "aṣṭāṅga-yoga". There is also a
stage called, a..., ho..., pratyahara where one cuts off all the senses. So,
now, in many ways, when a jñāna-yogi is practiced, what is their sadhana? They
may also use the sadhana of "aṣṭāṅga-yoga". Because their focus primarily is on
turning their consciousness inwards. So, when "jñānis", "jñānis" may use the
sadhana of bhakti-yoga, also. They may think that the personal brahman is a
temporary manifestation of the Absolute Truth. And based on that, they may try
to turn inwards. Or others may try to turn inwards using the process of
"aṣṭāṅga-yoga". Some others may try to do it by just mere speculation. Naiti.
Naiti. Naiti. So, it, whichever way they do it, then, the point is that they
turn away from the outward world towards the inner world.
"ātma-saṁyama-yogāgnau". So, they are, you know, self-controlled.
"ātma-saṁyama". So, Prabhupada translates that as controller of the mind. They
are trying to turn inwards. And into the fire of the controlled mind. "juhvati".
And who are these? "jñāna-dīpite". So, "jñāna-dīpite" is a beautiful word. Hmm.
Prabhupada translates it as because of the urge for self-realisation. So,
"jñāna-dīpa". "dīpa" is light. "jñāna" is knowledge. So, "jñāna-dīpite" means
because they are, they are illuminated by knowledge, they understand my real
life is not outwards. It is inwards. So, let me turn my whole consciousness
inwards. And Prabhupada gi..., talks about some technical words over here. So,
there are, he says, there are two kinds of souls. There is a "pratyag-ātmā" and
"parāg-ātmā". So, "parāg". "rāga" is attachment. "parā rāg" is when that
attachment is, you know, is directed outwards. So, the soul is attached to
things. That is "parāg-ātmā". The soul is attached. And "pratyag-ātmā" means,
the soul turns inwards. And the soul becomes detached. "pratyag".
"pratyahara", as we have. So, similarly, "pratyag". And then, "pra...", to
become "pratyag-ātmā" is the ultimate goal. And Prabhupada says that, there are
these five kinds of "vāyu"s. Which he mentions, briefly. He is explaing this to,
you know, he is using these two to explain "prāṇa-karmāṇi cāpare". So, there is
"prāṇa-vāyu", "apāna-vāyu", "vyāna", "samāna", "udāna". So, what is this, what,
the "prāṇa-vāyu" is basically our aspiration. The "apāna-vāyu", you know, goes
upwards. "vyāna-vāyu" acts to shrink and expand. "samāna-vāyu" is adjust
equilibrium. "udāna-vāyu" goes upwards.

So, now, it is interesting that, now, "prāṇa-vāyu" is one of the "vāyu"s? Or
al..., and also, "prāṇa" is also the generic word used to describe all the fives
"vāyu"s. So, just like the mind is referred to as one of subtle elements in the
subtle body along with intelligence and false ego. But sometimes, the mind may
be generically used to refer to the subtle body. So, we have the matter, mind
and consciousness. So, now, man..., mind is generically used to refer to the
subtle body of which mind is one component. So, like that, "prāṇa-vāyu" can be
generically used to refer to all the "prāṇa-vāyu"s. O..., or it can be used to
refer to, you know, one of the five kinds of "vāyu"s a..., a..., others have
other names. But all of them together are also called as "prāṇa-vāyu". So, they
have their specific functions. So, for example, "samāna-vāyu", if we see. At
sometimes, when the person starts turning round, and round, and round, we feel
vertical. So, why do we feel vertical? Oh, we start feeling chakra. Why? That is
because the "vāyu" is getting disinclined, is getting disrupted, disoriented.
So, the whole system of analysing the body in terms of "vāyu". It is
sophisticated system of analysis. You know, the, basically, when we want to look
at the body, there are different ways of looking at it. So, modern medicine
offers us one way of looking at the body. M..., the Vedic culture offers us to
un..., different ways o..., another way of looking at the body. In terms of
Prāṇāyāma. In terms of shakti. The ayurveda offers us another, somewhat related,
slightly different way of looking at the body. Which is based on Kapha, Vata,
Pitta. So, these are, of course, ayurveda and "prāṇā", "prāṇā-maya",
and "prāṇāyāma"'s perspective is shakti, and everything, they are related. We
will discuss about these more in the Eighth Chapter again. But the important
point is that, all these "vāyu"s can be directed inwards. The whole process of
"prāṇāyāma". Nowadays, it is practiced that, ok, you do this anulom vilom, your
a..., respiration and disease will go away. You do this very exercise, a, a...,
then, this, you do, do this particular kind of breathing, and this disease will
go away. Now, these may be happening. And these may be beneficial, also. But the
point is that is not the primary goal of doing all these activities. All these
activities, regulations of life airs is ultimately meant to turn our
consciousness inwards. Now, Krishna will describe futher. Till now, He described
different kinds of "yajñā"s in one verse over here.

        dravya-yajñās tapo-yajñā
        yoga-yajñās tathāpare
        svādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāś ca
        yatayaḥ saṁśita-vratāḥ

So, "dravya-yajñās". "dravya" is possessions, wealth. So, some people sacrifice
their wealth. "tapo-yajñā". Some people sacrifice in austerities. They do
sacrifice in austerities. "yoga-yajñās". Some people do practice ashtanga yoga.
"tathāpare". "apare" means some others. And "svādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāś ca". Some
people do the "svādhyāya-jñāna". They seriously study. So, what are they doing?
They are sacrificing their intelligence. So, so, in this way, "yatayaḥ". The
enlightened person. "yatayaḥ" can mean, "yati". "yati" is renunciate. "yatayaḥ"
is those who are endeavoring seriously. They are enlightened. They are
sacrificing. They are in that sense renounced. "saṁśita-vratāḥ". You know,
"saṁśita" means strict. So, they take strict vows. And they act accordingly.
Now, when they are acting in this way, what are they actually doing? They are,
you know, trying to connect with the Absolute Truth by sacrificing what is
available to them. What is accessible to them for a higher purpose. So, now,
Prabhupada gives examples of these. And there, he says that, "dravya-yajñās".
Sacrificing possessions, people give in charity. So, dharma-śālā, anna-kṣetra,
atithi-śālā, anāthālaya and vidyā-pīṭha. So:

"All these charitable activities are called dravyamaya-yajña."

Prabhupada says. So, now, if we will see, Prabhupada does not talk about this in
any negative way. He does not say, oh, it is all mundane. You should not do it.
We should only chant Hare Krishna. No. Krishna is reco..., a, telling this, this
is one way in which one can sacrifice. So, people who are doing charitable
activities. They are to be commanded for the principle of sacrifice that they
have. That is why they are doing those activities. Now, somebody may say, oh,
but they are doing it for name and fame. That is ok. You know, but at least,
they are seeking name and fame not just by going to parties and, you know,
trying to have, trying to, you know, say, get a big name by saying to how many
members of the opposite sex I have conquered. The, even they, they, even if they
are looking for name and fame. They are looking for it in a way that is
beneficial to others. They are not going to party and thinking. Gaving a
competition, you know, how many bottles of liquor you drank. I will drink more
bottles of liquor than you. People can seek name and fame in different ways,
also. So, sometimes, from basic statement in a more elevated way in the sense
that the person is, you know, al..., also thinking of the benefit of others.
Then, that is a, a, that is, a, see..., that indicates the consciousness is
situated in a higher mode. Then, "dravya-yajñās tapo-yajñā". Now, "tapo-yajñā",
Prabhupada talks about "cāturmāsya". So, "cāturmāsya", it can become a quite a
intricate ritual. In Krishna Consciousness, Srila Prabhupada did not go into the
technicalities. He just told general principles on, this month, avoid this. This
month, avoid this. This month, avoid this. And Prabhupada, he himself, a, you
know, he said, do not go in too many technical details of. Sometimes, in
"cāturmāsya", people just take one morsel of food per day. One, or one eating
per day. You know, Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura was doing that for a long
time when he was doing austerities, did tapasya to prov..., because he felt that
he wanted to become purer. So that he could preach vigorously. Then, there is
chandrayana. Chandrayana is also another kind of sacrifice involving certain
rituals which actually lead to purification. You know, and, now, Prabhupada
gives a chan..., here, for example, he says:

"under the cāturmāsya vow the candidate does not shave for four months during
the year (July to October), he does not eat certain foods, does not eat twice in
a day or does not leave home."

These are c..., "tapomaya-yajña". So, he does not shave for four months during the
year. So, some people ask, you know, we see this in our acharayas photo. We see
Gaurakisora Dasa Babaji. You know, some people some ask, you know, why is
Gaurakisora Dasa Babaji sporting a beard? Actually, he is not sporting a beard
as if that something fanciful object which has to be shown off. Nowadays, people
have made hair into a, a:

        lavanyam kesha-dharanam

It is said that, you know, the hair style i..., hair is considered a sign of
beauty. Hair style is considered to be one of the defining characteristics of a
person. So, that hair style for males, even the way they have their beard and
moustache, that also considered to be, you know, stylish. So, actually, th...,
when we see the picture of our acharyas. If they have beard, that is not because
they are sporting a beard or a moustache to show off. You know, that is because
the, those paint..., particular paintings are made based on how they are, you
know, recollected by their followers. And during, when they were performing
austerities during "cāturmāsya". During "cāturmāsya", when just put aside the
body. And tries to minimise the needs of the body. And focuses more and more on
the Absolute Truth. So, this, you know, engagement, this focus on the Absolute
Truth is very, you know, intense. And that is why they do not care for the
body. So, there are two ways to not care for the body. You know, especially with
respect to the hair. One is to completely neglect it, let it grow whichever way
it goes. And the other is to shave it off. So, normally, vaishnavas shave the
hair. But in some cases, some vaishnavas may just let it grow, a, a..., for, you
know, grow without bothering about it. They do not shave. That is also one way.
It is austerity. Because one is not trying to make it look very attractive it in
any way. Just, just do not focus on it. So, that is also one way of doing it.
Generally, devotees, they shave their hair. And then, Prabhupada talks about
"yoga-yajña".

        yoga-yajñās tathāpare
        svādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāś ca

Those involve study. So, all these are, you know:

"All these yogīs are faithfully engaged in different types of sacriﬁce and are
seeking a higher status of life."

They are all seeking a higher status of life. So, all the sacrifices are
ultimately meant for elevation. That Krishna will talk about in one of the later
verses. Prabhupada gives it to us right here itself. So, now, Krishna talks
about the next kind of "yajñā". Here, He is talking about controlling the
breath. So, this is basically related with yoga. Hmm. Process of "aṣṭāṅga-yoga".

        apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ
        prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpare
        prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā
        prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ
        apare niyatāhārāḥ
        prāṇān prāṇeṣu juhvati

So, based on the continuity of thoughts, Srila Prabhupada cuts the verse. So,
4.30 is brought up here in 4.29. And four point, we will see one of the later
verses. 4.31. It has only two lines instead of four lines. So, here, we have A,
B, C, D, E and F. This is talking about the advanced stage of "prāṇāyāma" in the
process of "aṣṭāṅga-yoga". So, "apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ". So, "apāne" is the air
that goes downwards. "prāṇaṁ" is the ju..., air that goes outwards. So, "apāne
juhvati prāṇaṁ". So, the idea is that one offers the outward airs in the inward.
And the inward air in the outward. "ap...", "prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpare". And then,
"prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā". And in this way, one "gatī ruddhvā". One checks the
movement of the airs. One therefore bring the movement of the airs to a steady,
a, steady state of neutrality. "prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ". Such a person is dedicated
to "prāṇāyāma". So, this, this is one kind of yoga. And there are others. You
know, He say, "apare niyatāhārāḥ". They, they are "apare niyatāhārāḥ". They
actually regulate their eating a lot. And "prāṇān prāṇeṣu juhvati". And they
offer their "prāṇā" in the air. They after, offer the outgoing air into itself.
So, we may wonder, what is all this talking about? Offer the outgoing air in the
downward air? What does it refer to? Prabhupada explains that briefly. So,
Prabhupada explains:

"The apāna air goes downward, and the prāṇa air goes up."

Up means, it comes up and then it goes out from the body. So, now, there are
different stages in this. So, Prabhupada says the:

"The prāṇāyāma-yogī practices breathing the opposite way until the currents are
neutralized into pūraka, equilibrium."

So, there is a particular way in which the body breathes. When we try to go in
the opposite way, that involves increasing one's willpower and regulating
oneself. So:

"Offering the exhaled breath into the inhaled breath is called recaka."

And both:

"When both air currents are completely stopped, one is said to be in
kumbhaka-yoga."

So, these are all technicalities, which are not a, the part of the Yuga Dharma
for Kali Yuga. So, we will not go into them. But the point is that this was one
of the rituals which was used, which was one of the form, you know, one of the
spiritual processes that was used to f..., for gradual spiritual advancement.
So, Krishna mentions this. But what, the important point He is saying is that,
we ha..., this is ultimately meant for attaining brahman. And in all these
purports, we will see, Srila Prabhupada maintains, maintains a consistent theme
that we should practice Krishna Consciousness. That, yes, these are all valid
rituals. They are a part of the valid rituals or processes. You know. And they
are a part of the broad Vedic culture. But the important point is that in this
Kali Yuga. We practice Krishna Consciousness. This is the ultimate
recommendation of Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. So, we will, now, when we look
at all these different processes that Krishna gives. Now, we can un...,
understand one part of the rationale that Krishna gi..., of the rationale of the
statement which Krishna gives at the end of the Gita. In 18.66, He says:

        sarva-dharmān parityajya
        mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

So, He says, so why is He saying "sarva-dharmān parityajya"? Give up all
varieties of religion. This is all the varieties of religions that are present
in the Vedic culture. So, Krishna is saying, give them up. Just "mām ekaṁ
śaraṇaṁ vraja". So, what Krishna gives at the end of the Gita, Prabhupada gives
us throughout the Gita. So, Prabhupada is not cancelling what Krishna is giving.
Prabhupada is giving the conclusion throughout. So that we do not get mis..., we
do not misunderstand. So that we do not, you know, lose out. So, Prabhupada
writes that:

"Reducing the eating process is very helpful in the matter of sense control. And
without sense control there is no possibility of getting out of the material
entanglement."

Reducing the eating process, Prabhupada says, very helpful. So, actually, now,
this does not mean that we have to, you know, intentionally starve ourselves.
The idea is not that we eat so less that we do not have any energy to do service
to Krishna. Not to do our responsibilities, and, you know, you know, and to use
the opportunities that is, Krishna sends our way. The important point is that,
we do not make eating a primary activity or a primary fantasy. You know, primary
activity means, oh, you know, that is what, constantly chewing something.
Munching something. You know, fantasising. Constantly thinking, when is the next
prasad? When is the next food coming? Next food coming? You know, like that, we
do not do that. We have, we, it is one part of life. And we do not eat a giant
item. So, how giant quantity. So, you know, you know, so, here, the, Krishna is
telling, lag..., Krishna will talk about this once again later. "laghv-āśī" in
Eighteenth Chapter. In the Sixth Chapter, He talks about regulation in terms of,
you know, taking, "ni...", "yuktāhāra-vihārasya". So, be, regulate the eating.
And Prabhupada says, just by taking prasadam, it is regulated. And when we eat
prasadam, also, if we keep the quantity and the, you know, quality regulated,
then that he..., goes a long way in keeping us sense-controlled. And, so
sense-control is important for liberation. It is the foundation for liberation.
Now, Krishna will describe in the next verse the broad principles of "yajñā".
So, now, He has given different kinds of "yajñā". Now, He tells, what is the
principle underlying it. What is the purpose of it. What is the essence of it.
That is what He talks about in the next set of verses. From here till 33.

        sarve ’py ete yajña-vido
        yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ
        yajña-śiṣṭāmṛta-bhujo
        yānti brahma sanātanam

"sarve ’py ete". All these people. "yajña-vido". "yajña-vido" means they are all
knowers of "yajña". And what happens? "yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ". They become,
"kalmaṣāḥ" is, you know, pu..., impurities. "yajña-kṣapita" is they become
purified. They become purified of all the impurities. "yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ".
Then, "yajña-śiṣṭa". "śiṣṭa" is, it refers to the remnants. "yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ
santo". That is the verse that, that is a part of the famous 3.13 verse. "śiṣṭa"
means what remains. "yajña-śiṣṭāmṛta-bhujo". So, "āmṛta-bhujo" means they taste
as nectar. "amṛta" can mean eternally. "amṛta" can mean nectar. So, what is the
remnant of "yajña" is "amṛta". And what happens when they taste that "amṛta".
"bhujo" means to taste. To relish. Then, "yānti brahma sanātanam". "yānti". They
go where? "brahma sanātanam". To the eternal brahm..., and, atmosphere, the
eternal supreme. So, wha..., Krishna is telling here, what happens when one
practices "yajña"? First, He says is, if one who does it, "yajña-vido". Those
who know the purpose of "yajña". When they act in this way. "vid...":

        sarve ’py ete yajña-vido
        yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ

By the practice of "yajña", the "kalmaṣāḥ" go away. So, first result of "yajña"
is purification. And ultimately, "yajña-śiṣṭāmṛta-bhujo". Then, they divide the
fruits of the result. And I attain liberation. "yānti brahma sanātanam". They
attain the "sanātanam", "brahma". The eternal spiritual platform. So, in this
way, essentially, what Krishna is talking about is that we all become purified
and liberated. Is it the two ultimate purpose of "yajña". Purification and
liberation. Now, of course, not all "yajña"s lead to purification and liberation
with the s..., with the same degree and the same speed. That will vary,
naturally. Because there are different level of commitment. Different level of
sacrifice. And different kinds of "yajña"s. But Krishna is giving us a unifying
vision of everything. There is a diversity of forms. If you think of, at one
level, a, the householders living householder life. And then we think about
"prāṇāyāma". Some yogis, they are regulating their breath. And there are others
who are absorbed in study. The external cultural forms may seem to be quite
different for all these people. But the unifying principle and purpose, what is
that? Purification and liberation. "kṣapita". "bhujo". "yajña-śi...".
"yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ". One becomes purified of, you know, l..., the impurities.
And "yānti brahma sanātanam". So, in this way, Krishna explains how there is a
common principle for all these. And then, the liberation can of course be
personal or impersonal as Srila Prabhupada mentions. Now, Srila Prabhupada gives
a verse fragment over here, you know, to, because in 29, he has given a longer
verse. So:

        nāyaṁ loko ’sty ayajñasya
        kuto ’nyaḥ kuru-sattama

This is a very short, but very potent verse. What does it say? "nāyaṁ loko". Not
in this world. "’sty ayajñasya". "ayajñasya" is without the performance of
"yajña". Without the performance of "yajña", even in this "lokaḥ", one cannot be
happy. "kuto ’nyaḥ kuru-sattama". "kuru-sattama". is oh, best of the Kurus. So,
a po..., it is a reference to Arjuna to indicate that you are not this kind of
person who does not do "yajña". You are a person who is best among Kurus. So,
definitely, you will perform "yajña". But those who do not do, "kuto ’nyaḥ".
What to speak of the next world? So, even in this world, people will not be
happy. See, when we understand "yajña" to be sacrifice. Actually, if people do
not do sacrifice, then there is no happiness even in this world. Generally,
people who just go out to do enjoyment. Say, I will go to a party. I will go to
a movie. I will go to the beach. I will go to a picnic. I will go here. I will
go there. When people go out to do activities just for the sake of enjoyment.
When they are pleasure-driven. When they are pleasure-centered. Where they are
not thinking about others. They are simply thinking of themselves. Me and me
alone. So, me first, and me only. So, all of, you know, all of us in one sense
are I specialists. I specialists. You know I. 43:03
