Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=06uTDYqRCiI
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_075_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_01_to_07_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=06uTDYqRCiI&event=video_description&redir_token=RvhvE3lbsZWLB2VnrPbbiPkFQM98MTU0ODQ4ODAyNUAxNTQ4NDAxNjI1

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We
completed the Fourth Chapter. Fourth Chapter was "Transcendental Knowledge".
With this, this Chapter on jn..., you know, titled Jnana i..., is a shas...,
assi..., bridge between two chapters on karma-yoga. Prabhupada tit..., titled
Chapter Three as "Karma-yoga" and Chapter Five as "Karma-yoga – Action in Kṛṣṇa
Consciousness". We have mentioned it, Fifth Chapter titled as karma, jnana karma
sannyasa yo..., you know, it is called as karma sannyasa yoga. And Fourth is
titled as jnana karma sannyasa yoga. So, you know, jnana karma sannyasa yoga
means, by jnana, one understands how one can actually practice karma in such a
way that one does the fruit. One does renunciation within karma. So, it is not
about, so, per say, sannyasa. But it is about sannyasa in karma, not sannyasa of
karma. So, that jnana, we acquire in the Fourth Chapter. And practically, how do
we do it? That will, we will, we will learn in the Fifth Chapter. So, the
essen..., karma sannyasa yoga does not mean sannyasa of karma. It means sannyasa
in karma. So, Krishna is going to talk about, you know, this essential principle
of not renunciation of action. But renunciation in action. In the Fifth Chapter.
And the whole theme of the Bhagavad Gita is that, action itself can lead one to
disentanglement and liberation if we, our action is done intelligently. So, that
we will discuss in the Fifth Chapter now. You know. The Fourth Chapter concluded
with Krishna telling Arjuna. "ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha bhārata". Rise and fight. The Fifth
Chapter begins with Arjuna having a doubt. You know. Arjuna's doubt comes
because prior to that, in 39, Krishna has talked about "śāntim". And in fif...,
41, Krishna has talked about karma sannyasa. So, both these, you know, you know,
togeth..., coupled with the non-reference to fighting in the entire Fourth
Chapter make Arjuna think that, you know, make Arjuna doubt whether Krishna
really want to, Arjuna to fight or not. So, the last instruction,
"ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha" seems to be contrary to the tenor, the tone, the mood of what
He has spoken, what Krishna has spoken earlier. That is why, a, the, creates a
doubt in Arjuna's mind. And Arjuna asks the question. So, in principle, Arjuna's
question is similar to His question in Third Chapter. So, some chapters in the
Bhagavad Gita are similar. Third and Fifth are similar. This, as we will see,
Seventh and Ninth are also similar. So, although they are similar, that is,
themes are similar. Krishna, whenever, He has to discuss same, the similar
themes only, also. Even He is discussing second time, He makes the concepts
deeper. He, you know, gives us deeper understanding of the concepts. So, we will
see how that happens in this particular chapter. So, let us look at, you know,
the Fifth Chapter. Before we go, start reciting the verse, let us look at the
overview of the chapter.

So, we can divide this into three broad sections. So, the first section is
kali..., karma-yoga is equal to, but easier than jnana-yoga. They are, you know,
you know, equal. You know. Both will give the same result. But karma-yoga is
preferable because it is easier. Then, seven to sixteen talks about a, by fixing
mind on atma, karma-yogi s..., remains free from bondage. So, elaboration
of the first ch..., six on..., first, the theme of the first six verses. How is
karma-yoga equal? You know, we sa..., vi..., vikarma, karma-yoga cau..., karma
causes bondage. And renunciation leads to liberation. So, Krishna is telling
that, act..., you know, if one is not fixing the mind on sense objects, instead,
one is fixing the mind on the soul. Then, you know, the karma-yogi will remain
free from bondage. And after that, Krishna says they are fixing the mind on
Su..., Supersoul, on the Paramatma. That seventeen to twenty-nine. The
karma-yogi will attain liberation. So, there are two phases. One is not getting
bound further. And second is getting liberated. Just like we may say that, when
we are sick. One is to, one part of the sickne..., a, one part of recovery is to
remove the sickness. Remove the infections, the germs that are, cause the
sickness. And the second is to regain the strength. So, Kr..., you know, first,
or we could say, first part is to prevent the aggravation of the sickness.
Whatever the infection, they should not spread further. And second part is to
ensure that, you know, one removes the sickness. And then, one regains the
health, also. Whichever way we look at it. The point is recovery involves these
two parts. You know, remove the negative. Stop the negative. And then, bring out
the positive. So, atma-jnana can help one to prevent further to act..., acting
in a way that leads to further bondage. And Paramatma-jnana, knowledge of the
Supersoul. Knowledge of the Supreme will lead to liberation. And in 29 to, and
that last section, 27-28 to 29, actually, karma-yoga will eventually lead to
m..., but K..., some form of renunciation. But Krishna, He does not recommend
jnana-yoga over here. He will, you know, recommend ashtanga-yoga. There is, talk
about in twenty..., verses 27 to 28. And that will be elaborated in Chapter Six.
And verse 29 talks about bhakti-yoga, which will lead, elaborate in Chapters
Seven to Twelwe. So, let us look at the first verse of the Seven..., Fifth
Chapter now.

        arjuna uvāca

        sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa
        punar yogaṁ ca śaṁsasi
        yac chreya etayor ekaṁ
        tan me brūhi su-niścitam

So, "sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa". That "sannyāsaṁ". When somebody wants to do,
take "sannyāsaṁ". "sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa". When one takes "sannyāsaṁ", at the
e..., one does karma accordingly. So, so, Krishna is telling here that, you have
recommended "karma", "sannyāsaṁ". That is a different to verse 10, 49.
"sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa". But then, in 10.42, you said, "punar yogaṁ ca
śaṁsasi". You know. "yogaṁ ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha parantapa". He says, equipped in yoga,
rise and fight. So, "yac chreya etayor ekaṁ". Among these, please tell me one.
One that which is "chreya". That which is long-term. So, Krishna, A..., He says,
Ar..., persistently been asked by Arjuna, please tell me, what is "chreya". And
"tan me brūhi". "brūhi" is I ask you now. Please tell me. "su-niścitam". This is
que..., question that has been going on. But now, tell me definitely.
"su-niści...", "niścitam" is itself is definitely. "su-niścitam" is the, it,
absolute definite, definiteness, with conclusive definiteness. Please tell me
what I should do. So, now, a, to this question, a, Krishna will reply.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca
        niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhau
        tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt
        karma-yogo viśiṣyate
        
So, "sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca". "niḥśreya". So, so, Arjuna had asked, what is
"śreya"? So, Krishna is telling that, "ubhau". Both of them are "śreya". Both of
them will lead to "niḥśreyasa". "niḥśreyasa" means long-term benefit. Both of
them will lead to long-term benefit. "sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca". But among those
two, "tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt". Among those two, "karma-yogo viśiṣyate".
"karma-yogaḥ" is better. So, now, the point of the Bhagavad Gita is that, a, one
should ensure that one does not become bound in material exis..., stay bound in
material existence. So, now, you know, what causes bondage is attachment. And to
the extent, one does not have attachment. To that extent, there is no bondage.
So, now, Krishna is telling, say that, actually, both karma-yoga and
karma-sannyāsāt, both k..., you know, they prevent detachment. So, in that
sense, both are good. But among the two, Krishna says karma-yoga is better. Why
is that better? Because that does not, that is more easy. Easier. So, now, Srila
Prabhupada, you know, does not focus so much on the comparative virtue of
karma-yoga or karma-sannyāsāt in this purport. He focuses more on the point that
we should not get bound. That that staying free from bondage is fundamentally
impro..., important. And "niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhau". Therefore, one should, you
know, avoid karmic bondage. And Prabhupada quotes the series of verses from the
teachings of King Ṛṣabhadeva in Fifth Canto, Fifth Chapter. You know, and, which
essentially underscore how the conditioned soul becomes bound. And how we should
stay free from bondage. Let us look at the verses. So, you know, 5.5.4–6, hmm:

        nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma
        yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti
        na sādhu manye yata ātmano ’yam
        asann api kleśa-da āsa dehaḥ

So, "nūnaṁ pramattaḥ". "pramattaḥ" means mad. In..., you know, in..., in...,
intoxicated with madness. "pramattaḥ" can mean intoxicated, can mean mad. So,
"kurute vikarma". Such a person does "vikarma". And what is "vikarma"?
"indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti". When one acts for sense gratification. One acts
for "indriya-prītaya". "na sādhu manye". This is not good. "yata ātmano ’yam".
Why is it not good? By that, a..., "’yam", by the soul will, soul will get
another body. "asann api kleśa-da āsa dehaḥ". So, what will happen is one will
continue in the cycle of birth and death. And "asann". The body is temporary.
But along with temporary, it is "kleśa-da". It gives misery. "asann api kleśa-da
āsa dehaḥ". So, we already have miserable body. And if we act for sense
gratification, then we show material nature that I want to enjoy the sense
objects. So, then, we will get another material body. But the material body is
subject to so many miseries. So, we will get all those miseries, also. Material
body gives us a, insignificant pleasure and significant pain. It gives
insignificant pleasure. The pleasure lasts for a few moments. But it gives
significant pain. Actually, the pain sometimes lasts for hours, months. Years
sometimes, when the person gets terrible diseases. So, "asann api kleśa-da āsa
dehaḥ". So, it is "kleśa-da". It is a, not "sukha-da". The body is "kleśa-da".
Now, how long will be, that person continue like this?

        parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto
        yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam
        yāvat kriyās tāvad idaṁ mano vai
        karmātmakaṁ yena śarīra-bandhaḥ

So, "parābhavas tāvad". So, till that time, there will be "parābhavas". Till
when? "abodha-jāto". As long as the person cr..., remains ignorant. "abodha".
"bodha" means knowledge. "abodha" means no knowledge. And, so as long as the
person is ignorant, a person will stay pa..., a, will have "parābhavas".
"parābhavas" is failure. So, why? Because "yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam". As
long as one does not inquire about the soul. Then, there is some default
activity which all of us have to do. So, if we do not know about spiritual
activity, by default, we will do material activity. So, "yā...", so, "yā...",
as long as there is no spiritual inquiry, then by default, "yāvat kriyās tāvad
idaṁ mano vai". So, the mind will be involved in "kriyāḥ". What kind of
"kriyāḥ"? "karmātmakaṁ yena śarīra-bandhaḥ". One will act for karma. And one
will act sin..., fruitive activity. "śarīra-bandhaḥ". One will become bound to
the body. So, actually, the soul and the body are separate. Just like we got an
example of the car and the driver. The car and the driver are two distinct
things. The driver can go out of the car. And driver can walk somewhere else,
also. Or can it take some other car. Or can reach home and may not need a car.
Whatever we. So, the two are different. But that soul and body are for all
practical purposes identical now. We do not think of ourselves as the soul. We,
for us, the soul is a n..., theoretical concept. Ok. Gita says I am not the
body. I am the soul. Also, I, intellectually, understand it. But for all
practical purposes, the soul has become melded into the body right now. Conc...,
not a, in terms of identity, the soul is always separate. But practically means,
from our experential perspective right now, it is very difficult to understand
the soul is different from the body. Why? That is because of the enjoying
mentality. The enjoying mentality welds the soul to the body. You know. The
welding when tha..., that happens. Two material come together. And they get
heated and tied together. Soul is actually different from the body. But the soul
has become welded and melded to the u..., body because of the desire to enjoy
the body. So, "śarīra-bandhaḥ". So, one becomes bound by the desire to enjoy the
sense objects. The desire to engage in fruitive activity by which one can get
sense, sense gratification. So, sense gratification, fruitive activity, both of
them bind the soul. Now, what is the difference between the two? Both are, in
one sense, similar. But sense gratification is directly acting to gratify the
senses. So, I may eat something. I may touch something. I may enjoy something.
That is sense gratification. Fruitive activity is the activity that leads to
sense gratification. So, for example, somebody may do some karma-kanda rituals
by which one may, ev..., later gets sense gratification. So, or we may do many
other activities. Which will also lead to sense gratifications, or fruitive
activities. That. Now, after that Krishna describes, karma..., you know, sorry,
there is, "Ṛṣabhadeva" Maharaja describes here.

        evaṁ manaḥ karma-vaśaṁ prayuṅkte
        avidyayātmany upadhīyamāne
        prītir na yāvan mayi vāsudeve
        na mucyate deha-yogena tāvat

So, "evaṁ manaḥ karma-vaśaṁ prayuṅkte". So, the mind will be in "karma-vaśaṁ".
You know, under the "vaśaṁ". "vaśaṁ" means control of karma. And
"avidyayātma...", "avidya", "avidyayātmany upadhīyamāne". One will be controlled
by "avidya" about the atma-tattva, about spiritual reality. How long? "prītir na
yāvan mayi vāsudeve". Till one does not develop "prītir" for Lord Vasudeva. And
then, "na mucyate deha-yogena tāvat". The contact of the soul with the body. We
use the word yoga to refer to connection or contact. So, we want, we want
karma-yoga, bhakti-yoga. But here, the word here curiously is used "deha-yoga".
So, soul has become bound to the body. The soul has become bound to the body. At
that time, "na mucyate". So that bon..., that contact, that bondage is the soul
to the body. "na mucyate". One will not become free from that till "prītir na
yāvan mayi vāsudeve". By till one has not developed attra..., affection to Lord
Vasudeva. What happens when we develop affection to Lord Vasudeva? Then, we, the
mind is no longer filled with the enjoying mentality. And the enjoying mentality
is what? Binds the souls to the body. So, that is how, by developing affection
for Lord Vasudeva, we become free from the enjoying mentality. And we become
free from material bondage thereof. So, Prabhupada's whole purport focuses on
this point of staying free from bondage. That is the first point. Then,
Prabhupada writes that, significant statement over here, "jñāna", knowledge:

"jñāna (or knowledge that one is not this material body but spirit soul) is not
sufﬁcient for liberation. One has to act in the status of spirit soul, otherwise
there is no escape from material bondage."

So, it is not enough to know. It is enough to, a, what is required, is also to
act. So, therefore, when we act, then there is liberation by that. So, now,
Prabhupada explains that that acting on the spiritual platform is practicing
devotional service. And we discussed this "vairā...", a, this
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu verse of how renouncing that which is, can be used in
Krishna's service is not renunciation. That, that is actually false
renunciation. That is "phalgu vairāgyaṁ". "yuktaṁ vairāgyam" is to renounce the
enjoying mentality and to use the things in Krishna's service. So, Prabhupada
makes the point, also. Which he would often speak. That actually nothing belongs
to us. So, what is there actually to renounce? You know. Everything, even our
body belongs to Krishna. Because it belongs to Krishna. So, therefore, the only
thing for us to renounce is the illusion that we have anything renounce.
Actually, what, the, we, a, nothing belongs to us. Everything belongs to
Krishna. And the only thi..., now, only thing to renounce is the illusion that
we have anything to renounce. So, that is the illusion. That. Ok. This is mine.
This is mine. This is mine. This is mine. And when we become free from that
renun..., you know, illusion, when we renounce that illusion. Then, we
understand, rather than things being mine, I am Krishna's. I am Krishna's. And
when I understand I am Krishna's, then, you know, and Krishna is mine.

        āmi to’ tomāra,  tumi to’ āmāra,
        ki kāja apara dhane

What else do any? Bhaktivinoda Thakura says. I am Yours. And You are mine. That
is all that is impor..., matters. So, in this way, one makes, you know, steady
spiritual advancement. Srila Prabhupada's point in a purport is we do not have
to renounce action. We do not have to renounce possession. We have to renounce,
you know, the, conc..., misconception that we are the enjoyers. We are
cooperators. When Krishna enjoys, then we also enjoy as His subordinate
enjoyers. Now, Prabhu..., Krishna continues this. So, He, first He is saying
that karma-yoga is better. Now, why karma-yoga is better? He will explain in the
next verses, now.

        jñeyaḥ sa nitya-sannyāsī
        yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati
        nirdvandvo hi mahā-bāho
        sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate

So, "jñeyaḥ". One should know. Such a person is "nitya-sannyāsī". Such a person
is a constant renunciate. Who is? "yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati". Such a person is,
neither resents, nor hankers. What does the person do? "nirdvandvo hi
mahā-bāho". Without duality, that person acts and "sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate".
Such a person will happily become free from bondage. So, here, Krishna is
talking about renunciation in action instead of renunciation of action.
Renunciation in, in action, He says is that we act, "yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati".
One does not hanker. One does not, you know, resent. Hanker means, oh, I want
that. I want that. And I have to, resent means. I, why have I got this? Why have
I got this? I do not want this. Why have I got this? Like that. Hanker and
resent. "na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati". "nirdvandvo". In this way, one stays free from
duality. So, how will this happen? When internally, one does not have
attachment. So, that detachment at this stage, Krishna is talking by the not
atma-jnana. Later on, when the Bhagavad Gita, thought flow process, that will
come by bhagavat-jnana. When we are attached to Krishna. We want to please
Krishna. Then, that aver..., attachment and aversion will go away. And Krishna
says, in this way, "sukhaṁ bandhāt". How "sukhaṁ bandhāt"? Because activity is
natural for us. And giving up activity is unnatural. So, because activity is
natural, therefore, it is much easier to do activity and stay free from bondage
rather than to do inactivity and seek v..., a, freedom from bondage. So,
externally, inactivity seems very sim..., very easy. You know. I just sit and do
nothing. But internally, inactivity is very difficult. Because there is so much
passion in the body. And the passion makes us, I want to go here. I want to see
this. I want to do that. And that will make us go round, and round, and round.
It will not allow us to stay peaceful. So, externally, inactivity may seem easy,
you know, but internally, it is difficult. And externally, activity may seem
difficult. But internally, activity is easy. It is according to our nature. Not
just our conditioned nature, but also our eternal nature. As souls, also, we are
active in service to Krishna. Therefore, "sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate". "sukhaṁ
bandhāt". So, happily, one will become free from bondage. So, Prabhupada
explains in the purport that a devotee is always liberated because the devotee
acts always for the pleasure of Krishna.

"There is no duality in his mind because whatever he does, he does for Kṛṣṇa.
Being thus freed from the platform of dualities, he is liberated – even in this
material world."

So, how does doing everything for Krishna keep one free from duality? Because a
devotee does not think in terms of, oh, this is pl..., this is good. This is
bad. You know, from material tongue. A devotee simply think, I want to serve
Krishna. Whatever comes in my life, I will see ho..., how it can be used to
serve Krishna. How it can be, you know, tapped as an opportunity for service to
Krishna. And because the service to Krishna can be performed in all situations.
Of course, the form of service may change. But the idea that I am the servant of
Krishna, that can be c..., sustained in all situation. That is how a devotee
stays liberated from the circumstances. Now, Krishna will clarify this further.
This point of how one can stay free from bondage. You know. You know.

        sāṅkhya-yogau pṛthag bālāḥ
        pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ
        ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag
        ubhayor vindate phalam

So, "sāṅkhya-yogau". So, here, Krishna is saying that "sāṅkhya" refers to the
ana..., the process of jnana, the, the process involving inaction. And "yogau"
refers to the process involving action. So, going back to 5.2, "sāṅkhya" refers
to "karma-sannyāsāt". And yoga refers to karma-yoga. "pṛthag", g..., that these
two are separate. The people who think this are "bālāḥ". "bālāḥ" are childish,
or ignorant, or less intelligent. And He says, as contrary to "bālāḥ", there are
"paṇḍitāḥ". "pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ". So, peo..., the wise people do not say
that two are di..., two are different. They are, Krishna is how the, how, how
are they same? Because He says that "ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag". If one becomes
situated in one of them, then "ubhayor vindate phalam". One gets the fruits of
both of them. So, "ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag". Situated oneself in one of those,
one will get the fruits of both. "vindate phalam". Both fruits will get. So, He
is, Krishna is telling that both are, you know, similar, both are not
differe..., non-different because their ultimate goal is the same. And that, He
will more exp..., make more explicitly clear in the next verse. So, I will
explain both the verses together.

        yat sāṅkhyaiḥ prāpyate sthānaṁ
        tad yogair api gamyate
        ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca
        yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati

"yat sāṅkhyaiḥ". That which is obtained through "sāṅkhyaiḥ". That is obt...,
obtained through "karma-sannyāsāt". "prāpyate sthānaṁ". The "sthānaṁ". The
destination that is obtained. "tad yogair api gamyate". That one attains by the
practice of yoga, also. And understanding this, "ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca".
When one sees "sāṅkhyaṁ" and "yogaṁ", both to be equal. "yaḥ paśyati". One who
sees like this. "sa paśyati". One who sees thus is the actual seer, is the
actual seer. "yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati". Suk..., so, there is diversity in path.
But there is uniformity in goal. There is diversity in path. But there is
uniformity in goal. Now, Krishna is, now, now, this is, these verses are no ways
supporting the idea that all paths lead to the same goal. Krishna is talking
about two specific paths over here. The path of, you know, you know, path of
intellectual introspection in inaction, and the path o..., path of, you know,
you know, you know, inaction based on jnana-yoga and the path of action based on
karma-yoga. You see, both these two lead to the same goal. Not that all paths
lead to the same goal. That is not a Gita teaching at all. In fact, that is not
a logical teaching, also. Leave alone a scriptural teaching. So, that was what
we already discussed in 4.11. Here, Krishna is talking something different. He
is taking two specific paths. And the goal of both of these paths to ultimately
free us from bondage. And He is saying that both these paths can free one from
bondage. But the vital point is, when will they free us from bondage? When they
are done with detachment. So, whether one has d..., authentic detachment and
renounces the world, renouncing all the activity, and renouncing all involvement
with the world. Or one has detachment. And one lives and acts in the world. If
one has detachment, in both cases, one will re..., one will be able to attain
freedom from bondage. But actually, He says, while doing activity, you know,
because doing activity is natural for us. So, detachment while doing activity,
hmm, is easier to do than detachment while giving up activity entirely. Because
giving up activity is unnatural. So, but here Krishna is not talking about the
difference. Now, He already said that this is better. Which is better?
Karma-yoga is better. But now, He is saying, both of them are the same. Both of
them ultimately lead to the same goal. That is, destination is obtained by
"sāṅkhyaṁ". That destination is also obtained by yoga. And therefore, ekaṁ
"sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca". So, now, how does this work out? That do both lead to
the same destination? See, normally, there is a hierarchy. There is karma-yoga.
Then, there is jnana-yoga. And there is bhakti-yoga. So, karma-yoga is higher
than jnana-yoga. Karma-yoga is lower. And jnana-yoga is higher. But when
jnana-yoga is higher. Why is Krishna saying that the two are not different? The
two, both are ultimately similar. They are "ekaṁ". How are they "ekaṁ"? Because
both are meant to take one towards the same goal. So, the karma-yogi is also
ultimately aiming for liberation. The jnana-yogi is also ultimately aiming for
li..., liberation. And by practicing karma-yoga, also, one can attain
liberation. By practicing jnana-yoga, also, one can attain liberation. So, in
terms of the goal, karma-yoga and jnana-yoga are similar. So, now, Krishna 27:02
