Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DhtCNnxwyT8
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=DhtCNnxwyT8&redir_token=iVr9t6rW4rRWlIgTk9W9PtV6bGl8MTU0ODQ4NzU1M0AxNTQ4NDAxMTUz&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_060_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_03_to_09_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita course. We are now in the third
chapter. When we are discussing the first section of the third chapter. So, let
us have a quick overview of the sections. So that we will understand what we are
doing. Yesterday, primarily, we discussed the rationale for Arjuna's question.
So, the fir..., we will now be discussing the first section of the third
chapter. Karma-yoga is better for you as you are not qualified for jnana-yoga.
That is the essential message from the first section. So, let us look at this
message. And then, we will go to the details of the various verses. So, we
discussed in 3.3, Krishna was telling that there are two ways of practicing
spiritual life. So, there are two levels at which one can practice s...,
spiritual life. "loke ’smin dvi-vidhā niṣṭhā". Karma-yoga and jnana-yoga. Now,
Prabhupada writes over here that:

"Religion without philosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while
philosophy without religion is mental speculation."

So, both of them are important. And religion enables us to actually do the
activities. So, chanting Hare Krishna is, we can say, religion. Studying the
Bhagavad Gita is philosophy. So, of course, these are not so descriptive.
Studying, studying v..., Bhagavad Gita, because it is the words of Krishna, you
can also say that is, that is religion. You know, because it is a devotional
activity. But in general, that which involves an intellectual, systematic
understanding, that is the philosophical part. And the religion part is that
which involves doing something by which we move forward towards gaining that
experience. So, when there is only philosophy, but there is no philosophy, then
it is sentiment. Oh, why do you f..., worship Krishna? Because it feels good.
And then, what happens? Somebody says that, oh, actually, you know, I feel that
so and so, baba, when I worship Him. That feels very good. So, that is not
worshipping that person. So, then, how do we know what is right and what is
wrong? So, that, it is, can be sentiment. And it will be sentamentalism. And
then, it can go into fanatism, also Why fanatism? Because one may start thinking
that, oh, oh, I worship this particular God. This is my God. This is how I
worship. If you do not worship this, you are going to go to hell. So, when there
is no philosophical understanding. That is just belief. Then, it can become
fanatism. On the other hand, philosophy without religion, is mental speculation.
Because if there is nothing what person is doing philosophy. Oh. Maybe, it is
like this. Maybe, it is like that. Maybe, it is like that. Then, basically,
there is no transformation that is happening. And when, so, maybe, you know,
there is so much order in the world. Maybe, God exists. Somebody sits like that,
on a, sits on an armchair, on a Sunday afternoon after a heavy meal, and starts
thinking. Maybe, God exists. Then, we pick up the newspaper and say, oh, 25000
people killed in an earthquake. Hey, that is so much suffering. Where was God at
that time? Probably, God does not exist. Anyway, picks up a bottle of wine. The
pleasure in this wine exists. So, let me just drink that and enjoy. So, this is
when people stay at a mental speculation platform. They are not doing anything
to realise the higher realities. And that is when it becomes a problem. So, if
we want to realise something higher. We need to actually practice spiritual life
systematically. And for practicing spiritual life systematically, we need
philosophical understanding. So, religion and philosophy, when both are there,
then we move forward steadily in our spiritual life. So, I just show a diagram
here which illustrates this point of spiritual and religious. So, this is an
article which I have written. It is published in Back to Godhead. So, hmm, hmm.
Behe..., yeah. Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. So, spirituality, a higher dimensional science.
So, spirituality has two levels. There is philosophy. And there is religion. So,
just as science has two aspects. There is theory. And there is experiment. So,
when there is theory and experiment both. Then, science becomes a complete body
of knowledge. So, for example, a, Newton absor..., observed the fruit falling.

So, maybe thousands of people had observed the fruit falling before. The only
thought that th..., came in their mind is let me pick it up and eat it. They did
not think of anything more than that. But Newton, when he observed it. He
thought. Why is this happening? Why it..., and then, he posted it, the principle
of gravity over there. So, theory means we observe something and try to come up
with, try to, you know, find out the explanation for it. Now, after I c..., I
posted it, some explanation for something which I have observed. How do I know
whether explanation is correct or not? That is, for that, there is experiment.
So, then, ok. If that fruit falls here, the fruit should fall everywhere in the
world. And if there is a force which is there among all material objects. Then,
even if I throw up a stone, it should f..., come down. And not just I, anybody
throws up a stone, it should come down. And not just stone, different object,
whatever object it can be, it should come down. So, there is, we do ex...,
various experiments by which one confirms the theory or disproves the theory.
So, similarly, with respect to spirituality, we have philosophy and religion.
So, in philosophy, what do we observe in philosophy? That, ok, philosophy tells
us that I am not the body. I am the soul. So, I think that, you know, I do not
want to die. Yet, there is death. And I am just knocked out. So, where does my
longing for immortality come from? And how can I, you know, is there some way
that I can live forever? So, where does a longing for immortality coming from?
Because there must be a part of me which is actually immortal. So, that way, we
can come to know that I am not the body. I am the soul. So, of course, we also
come to know from scripture about we are not the body. We are the soul. But even
from logic, we can point towards that. Now, once we come to know the philosophy,
how do I know? Whether it is right or wrong. Whether I am not the body. I am the
soul. How do I know that? The way is by practice. So, then, if I am the soul,
and the soul has a life of su..., unending supreme happiness at the level of
spiritual reality in loving Krishna. Then, if I try to live spiritually. If I
try to practice devotional service, then I will experience happiness. I will
experience a higher happiness by which my lower drives, my lower desires will go
down. So, that is what religion does for us. So, religion is like the
experiment. So, by reli..., the purpose of practicing religion is to experience
the, you know, higher spiritual realities. So, when we chant Hare Krishna, what
happens when we chant Hare Krishna? We do jappa. We do kirtan. We experience
some deeper peace, a richer happiness. And then that happiness freeze us from
our bad habits. Many of the unwanted habits, which we wanted, which we may have
wanted to give up earlier. But we are not able to give up. After we start
practicing spiritual life, we are able to give it up. So, this acts like a
confirmation for us. So, religion and philosophy, when both are there. Then,
the spirituality becomes a higher dimensional transformational science. How
higher dimensional transformational? Because, you know, i..., it is dealing with
the dimensions higher than what, you know, modern science deals with. That is
why it is higher dimensional. And how transformational? Because it involves
inner transformation. It involves experience of higher reality. The difference,
of course, between mo..., material science and spiritual science is that, you
know, material science is experimental. Whereas spiritual science is
experiential. We have to ex..., the experiment is to be done on us. And we have
to experience that difference. So, in that sense, it is experiential. But it is
also a science. Because f..., when we chant Hare Krishna. Anybody in any part
of the world, if that person chants Hare Krishna, that person experiences a
higher happiness, and becomes gradually freed from the lower drives.

So, we see that, Srila Prabhupada's Krishna Con..., when he pursued Krishna
Consciousness, people from America, Africa, Australia, you know, you know, even
various parts of the world, Europe, Russia, wherever, what, all different
background who have never even heard of Krishna anytime. Even they all became
purified. They all became elevated. So, this is how there is the universality.
Just like in science, the principles are universal. Of course, we do not know
whether in science, the principles are universal. But as far as our observation
goes, gravity seems to apply everywhere. So, just but, it is, but, by
repeatability, that is the characteristic of f..., a good scientific theory.
Similarly, there is repeatedability, that is there in spirituality, also.
Anybody who practices, that person experiences transformation. So, you know, in
bhak..., in the bhakti science, our heart is the laboratory. And chanting is the
process, procedure. So, when we practice the procedure of chanting, you know, in
the laboratory of our heart, we see the transformation. So, bhakti is a science.
And Prabhupada says that, when both are not there. Now, looking back from this
perspective. If there is only philosophy. And there is no religion. Then, that is
like, there is only theory, and there is no experiment. Then, anybody can come
up with any theory. You know, anybody can come up with any theory. And then,
what is the validity of that science? Not much validity. Because there is not
much, a, way of a, evaluating, and confirming which is, theory is right. Which
is wrong. There has to be experiment. So, similarly, there is religion. Religion
is what brings about the transformation. And, so, if so, theo..., the philosophy
will remain speculative and unauthoritative if there is no religion. Just as a
theory will remain speculative and unauthoritative, there is no experiment. On
the other hand, if somebody simply does experiment, and not knowing what the
theory is, then, it will be pointless in many ways. As, suppose, somebody is
doing a theory, experiment to find out, ok, this is a, this, and, an acid and
alcali, when we mix them together, then we get salt and water. So, now, I want
to find out, what, what is the strength of the alkali over here. So, I put in
this much acid, this change happen. This much acid, this change happens. This
much acid, this change happens. So, I do not, if I am not knowing what is the
theory, what is the purpose of the experiment. I just keep doing it, doing it,
nothing will happen. Or, w..., nothing will happen means no understanding will
come to me. Because I am just letting things happen. But I do not have any
background understanding. So, similarly, when people do religion
ritualistically. Then, there is some benefit. The, but, actually, people do not
have a deeper conviction about what they are doing. Why they are doing. So,
when, a, for example, a child is throwing a ball at a wall now. Tuck. Tuck. And
he is throwing the ball and catching the ball. Ba..., catch..., throwing the
ball, it over. And catching, it will comes back. You know, If somebody is, say,
a mechanical engineer. And that person has scientific knowledge about the
strength of a, materials. And then that person throws a ball at a wall. And
then, if he finds, ok, that ball is, throw over here, then it comes back fast.
If you throw the ball over here, it comes back slow. Then, because that person
has knowledge, then observe. Ok, that means the wall is thicker, th..., you
know, stronger here. It is weaker here. So, basically, the same activity is
being done. But because there is background knowledge. So, therefore, there is a
clearer understanding of what is happening. And one's understanding deepens.

So, one has some understanding. And of, further observation, the understanding
deepens. Similarly, people, there are so many thousands of people, especially in
places where the spiritual culture is still there. Who go to temples and they
glorify God. And they get some, they feel so peaceful. They feel s..., something
good about it. But if they do not have philosophical understanding, their
inclination to continue to do that may not last. Because they may find that, oh,
I can go to movie theater. That also makes me feel good. So, then, you know,
when other alternatives come up, then they may feel, ok, thi..., this is good,
let me do this only. So, if it is entirely based only on feelings, then it
cannot last for very long. Whenever alternatives come up. Whenever o...,
obstacles come up, one may give it up. But for a devotee, now understands, ok, I
feel so good when I chant. Why do I feel so good? It is because I am connected
with Krishna. And Krishna is the source of all happiness. I am experiencing
spiritual happiness. And then, sometimes, I am not feeling so good. So, like a,
throw the ball on wall over here, it comes back properly. When I throw it here,
it does not come back properly. So, when I see this difference, I observe. Ok,
that means the wall must not s..., have good quality. So, sometimes, I feel
ch..., sometimes, I chant, I do not feel good. Why is that? Oh, it must be 
because the lower modes are affecting me. So, our, the mo..., modes keep going
up and down like a sine wave. They make my consciousness go up and down like a
sine wave. So, now, I must be in a tamasic mode. That is why I am not feeling
any. But I just "tam stitha suka vayu". If I just tolerate it. The tama-guna
will go away. And the taste will come again. So, like that whatever is happening
to us, if we have background philosophical understanding, then we learn from it.
And we grow by it. That is why we need to have a balance of both philosophy and
religion. And that is what Srila Prabhupada has given us. We have ch..., we have
ch..., for example, the morning programme that we have. We have chanting. We
have darshan. You know. Twice, we have darshan. We have the mangala aarti
darshan. And then we have the shringar aarti darshan. And then, we have kirtans.
So, all this is, and, of course, we have jappa. All this is the religion part.
And then, we have the Bhagavatam class. There is the philosophy part. So, like
that, all of us individually, even if you are not able to attend the temple,
morning programme. You know, we create our own situation. We have some
philosophy and some religion. And when we combine both of them, then we move
forward steadily in our spiritual life. So, that is how philosophy and religion
are integrated together in the standard programme, Srila Prabhupada, by
Sri..., given by Srila Prabhupada. And we also have to have a balance in our
practice of spiritual life. So, roughly, Prabhupada is correlating over here
philosophy with jnana and religion with a, karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga. That is
a rough correlation. And we will discuss about this much later. You know, later
in our, a course. Yeah. So, let us move to the next verse now.

        na karmaṇām anārambhān
        naiṣkarmyaṁ puruṣo ’śnute
        na ca sannyasanād eva
        siddhiṁ samadhigacchati

So, "na karmaṇām anārambhān". When one has n..., when one does not do karma.
"anārambhān" is beginning. So, if one does not begin karma, 16:20
