Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KjiTawa1Y6Q
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=KjiTawa1Y6Q&event=video_description&redir_token=Oyw3O60sWMro9cDZEwqFCr5sd-x8MTU0ODQ4Nzc0MEAxNTQ4NDAxMzQw&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_066_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_37_to_40_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. Today, we will discuss
the last part of the third chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. So, we discussed
Arjuna's question, 3.36. What is that impells to sin? Let us look at Krishna's
answer now in 3.37.

        śrī-bhagavān uvāca

        kāma eṣa krodha eṣa
        rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ
        mahāśano mahā-pāpmā
        viddhy enam iha vairiṇam

So, Krishna says, "kāma eṣa". It is lust indeed. "eṣa". This. "krodha eṣa".
"krodha" is anger or wrath. How do they begin? "rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ".
"udbhavaḥ" is to be created. "sama" means with. They arise, with born of.
"rajo-guṇa". So, when we come into "rajaḥ-guṇa", then "kāma" and "krodha" come.
"mahāśano mahā-pāpmā". It is "m...". "aśanaḥ" is to eat or to devour.
"mahā-aśanaḥ" is that which is a great devourer. "mahā-pāpmā" is that which is,
you know, extremely sinful. Very very sinful. Very great devourer. "viddhy enam
iha vairiṇam". Know this to be "vairi". "vairi" is the enemy. Know this to be
the enemy. So, now, so, Arjuna's question was, what is it that impells us to
sin? So, Krishna says that it is lust. And then, it is anger. Which is v..., the
all-devouring, Prabhupada translate, all-devouring sinful enemy of the world.
So, "iha vairiṇam". The word "iha" is often used in the Bhagavad Gita to refer
to this world.

        ihaiva tair jitaḥ sargo
        yeṣāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥ

This will, verse will come in, later on, also in the fifth chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita. Where Krishna will talk about "sāmye". He says that those are
situated in equanimity. They have actually conquered. They have attained
brahman. "ihaiva". "ihaiva" means in this world. So, "iha" also means here. So,
in this world, for everyone, lust is an enemy. And lust transmogrifies.
Transmogrifies means, transform is to change, transmogrify, om..., that means to
change into an ugly form. So, lust transmogrifies into anger, wrath. So, what
exactly is this lust? Where does it come from? Prabhupada's purport is very
interesting. So, Prabhupada writes that, how all of us are expansions,
ultimately, of the Su..., Supreme Lord.

        eko bahusyan

The Lord:

"expanded Himself into many for His ever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the
living entities are parts and parcels of this spiritual bliss."

So, it is interesting word. Prabhupada is not saying we are parts and parcels of
the Lord. He is saying that we are parts and parcels of this spiritual bliss.
Now, what does it mean? How can we be parts of bliss? So, it, the, it is a usage
which indicates the point that we are meant to be blissful. So, we are parts of
Krishna, no doubt. But Krishna is Himself "ananda yo bhyasa". The, He is,
actually full of joy. And similarly, we are also part of joy. So, Prabhupada is
referring to that over here. Now, we are, Krishna is blissful. We are blissful.
But the difference is that Krishna is independently blissful. We are dependently
blissful. We are tiny. Because we are tiny, if we try to enjoy separate from
Krishna, the happiness that we can get through that is tiny. When we connect
with Krishna, the happiness we get through that is huge. So, therefore, what is
advised, what is glorified is that we connect with Krishna. Then, we can get
enormous happiness. You know, and that is the ultimate goal which is being
sought over here. So, we, now, w..., w..., because we are tiny, we can, if we
try to enjoy ourselves, we will get only tiny happiness. But when we try to
enjoy separately, there is another consequence that comes. That desire to enjoy
separate from Krishna disconnects us from Krishna. And then, we come under
illusion. And we seek enjoyment, where there is no enjoyment. So, we seek
enjoyment in this world in the objects of this world. And that causes bondage
and suffering. So, how do we come out of this bondage and suffering? For that,
we have to inquire about spirituality. So, Prabhupada writes in the purport.
Hmm.

"This material creation is created by the Lord to give facility to the
conditioned souls to fulﬁll these lustful propensities, and when completely
bafﬂed by prolonged lustful activities, the living entities begin to inquire
about their real position."

So, when they are completely baffled, then they begin to inquire. So, "athāto
brahma-jijñāsā". That is what Prabhupada will talk about in next verse. So, when
will the person do "brahma-jijñāsā"? Actually, as long as the person is caught
up in doing a, "indriya trupti-jijñāsā". That person will have no impetus for
doing "brahma-jijñasa". "indriya tripti-jijñāsā" means, oh, where will I get,
enjoyment? You know. I may get enjoyment. I may get enjoyment here. So, the
whole culture, media, advertisements in today's society, they provide us with
newer and newer avenues for "indriya tripti-jijñāsā". Oh, enjoy here. Enjoy
there. Enjoy there. This is where you will enjoy. And you know, sometimes,
nowadays, on television, there are three hundred channels. And people, who say,
don't they think, there must be at least one programme that I will enjoy. And I
start, start surfing. It is boring. And switch to another channel. And switch to
another channel. Switch to another channel. Switch to another channel. So,
actually speaking, you know, people, when they are watching TV, they are more
eager when they are surfing channels than then, when they are watching channels.
Because when they are surfing, they are expecting. Oh, maybe, I will get
something better. Something better. Something better. But once they start
watching, it is boring. You know. It is. It is not what I expected. It is not as
enjoyable as I expected to be. So, there may be three hundred channels on the
TV. But actually, happiness is not available on any channel. It is available,
happiness is actually available only on the bhakti channel. And that is not
there on television. Even if there are some programme which talk about bhakti.
Just, they themselves cannot make us happy. It is, the bhakti channel is our
connection with Krishna. So, yes, of course, if there are devotional programmes,
coming from proper sources. We can watch them. But the important point is that
the conditioned soul gets really excited. Yes, maybe, this will make me happy.
This will make me happy. So, "athato indra trupti-jijñāsā". Let me see. Where
can I get happiness? Where can I get happiness? But after prolonged lustful
activities, you know, c..., soul is completely baffled. You know. There is no
happiness in sense gratification. So, I have tried so much. What should I do
now? And at that time, maybe, there is happiness somewhere else. That is what I
need to inquire. And it is that point, then "brahma-jijñāsā" begins. So,
"brahma-jijñāsā" is just, it is not just an idle intellectual inquiry.
"brahma-jijñāsā" is not just an idle intellectual inquiry. Idle intellectual
inquiry means somebody just sits down on armchair, and thinks, hey, you know, is
there something called spiritual world? Is there something called God? Maybe.
Maybe not. Anyway. Who can know about these things? So, let me just turn on my
ipod, i..., and enjoy some music. Or let me turn on television and watch some
TV. So, no. That sort of inquiry, anyway, we, somebody inquires about
spirituality, that is good. But that sort of inquiry is not really
"brahma-jijñāsā". You know. "brahma-jijñāsā" is when one is serious. Is there
something beyond this world? If there is, I want to know about it. Because what
is in this world does not satisfy me. It is all tiny. It is all insignificant.
It is all an anticlimax. So, then, one starts thinking. What? What can be there
me on this world? Let me find that out. And that is how the person starts
inquiring about spirituality. So, therefore, the important point is, that all of
us, you know, we ha..., all have to come to that level some time. We may have got
some realisations of the ultimate futility of sensual pleasures. But although we
get that realisation, that realisation does not stay an ultimate realisation.
Because again, the world is filled with so many promise of sense gratification
that maybe this will give me happiness. Maybe, that will give me happiness. So,
again, we return back to the same things. So, if you want to go beyond that,
what we need to do is, we need to get a channel where, which we can also
experience spiritual happiness. And then, we contrast. This happiness is so
fulfilling. This happiness is so unfulfilling. Why should I chase after that?
Let me chase after that. So, "athato brahma-jijñasa" actually begins when we
become frustrated with material enjoyment. And start seriously seeking for
spiritual enjoyment. So, Prabhupada, in a lecture, to the hippies, in one of the
Rathayatra festivals in America, said. So, all of you hippies, you are
considered, you are not very much a pleasure to the America. You are considered
frustrated people. You know. People think that, oh, you are all frustrated. But
Prabhupada said, you know, I appreciate all of you. He said, human life is meant
to become frustrated. Human life is meant to become frustrated. You know, he
said, actua..., but frustrated in what sense? Frustrated in, so, in America,
people had huge amount of enjoyment available. Actually, after the Second World
War, America became enormously prosperous. Because, practically speaking, no,
none of the Se..., you know, none of the Second World War conflicts were fought
on American territory. So, America suffered very little casualties in terms of,
you know, infrastructure damage. Of course, there were some soldiers who were,
k..., who ki..., killed. The only attack on American territory was on P...,
Pearl harbour. That was right at the flag end of the war, practically speaking.
And America provided weapons to the allies. And selling weapons means, getting
money, also. So, the, they did not suffer much damage. And they got a lot money.
So, tho..., the, for World War II veterans, they, when they came back. They had
a fairly good life with them. And when, so they, generally, whatever m...,
material dreams people have, want to have a good house, and I have a good
family, a good job, a good bank balance. You know, these, these kind of dreams,
the children of the Second World War veterans, they had all this right from the
beginning of their lives. Second World War ended 1945. And ni..., nineteen sixty
f..., 1960-65, the gen..., the generations of the children, they had all this.
And they had it all. And they felt that it was too, it was nothing. It did not
satisfy them. So, what the previous generation of Americans were dreaming about.
This is what we should have. These people had this. And they felt that there is
nothing in it. I want this, there must be something more to life. And that is
how they started exploring. Maybe, we will get this ho..., whatever more is there
in life, maybe, we will get it through drugs. And that is how they started going
towards drugs. Later on, of course, they started, they, once they got into
drugs, drugs got into them. And then, they got caught by drugs. And it just
became a search for drugs, not a search for spirituality. So, that was u..., 
unfortunate.

But there was some people who d..., did seriously seek spiritual experiences
through drugs. And Prabhupada told them that Hare Krishna is a, will give you,
as a spiritual experience which is far greater than the experience that you may
get through drugs. So, now, Prabhupada is saying that, human life is meant to
become frustrated. That this, you know, routine stereotype life of trying to
make it, you know, happy and big in this world. That is not the ultimate goal of
life. One should seek something higher. So, "athāto brahma-jijñāsā". Now, then
Prabhupada says that, how does one, you know, hmm, this is a very significant
point.

"the origin of lust is also in the Supreme."

Now, how can be said that the origin of lust also in Supreme? Because Prabhupada
says "janmady asya yato". Everything comes from Supreme. So, even lust will come
from the Supreme. So, what does it mean that lust come from the Supreme? It
essentially means that the desire, desire for loving, and the desire for being
happy, which is what creates the male-female attraction. Which is what underlies
the male-female attraction. That actually is present in Supreme also. So,
everything come from the Supreme. So that, desire, lust, also, in its original
form, it is called ādi-rasa, that comes from the Supreme. And it is meant to be
directed towards the Supreme. When it is misdirected, then that causes
suffering. And Prabhupada gives example of redirections of this desire is there,
if it goes down lower, then it can become ange..., anger, and it can cause a
lot of suffering. But it moves upwards, then it can become transcendental. So,
Prabhupada gives the example of Hanuman, spiritualising anger. But the important
point here is that where does lust come from? It comes from the Supreme Lord.
And it is a misdirection of our original search for happiness. So, Krishna is
telling, "mahasano maha-papma". It is all-devouring sinful enemy. Why
all-devouring? All-devouring, because once a person becomes lusty, actually,
lust can just go out of control. And it can blind a person completely. You know,
fo..., once this, there is normal sexuality. Then, there is, you know, there is
all sorts of, you know, different kinds of sexualities which people have. You
know, homosexuality, and bisexuality, and this sort of things. And then, beyond
that, there can be, you know, different kinds of, even perversities that are
there. So, there can be pedofilia, where chi..., where male people are attracted
to small children. And after, they brutalise small children in that. And this is
even coming in a very, very revolting way in the form of, you know, abuse of
children within families. You know, small, small children, many of them suffer
child abuse. You know, because th..., they have some relatives whom the family
members trust. And those relatives, they sometimes bruta..., you know, violate
and a, brutalise the children. It is terrible. And sometimes, it ha..., when it
may happen with parents, also, bru..., you know, abusing children. That is rare.
But that al..., you know, a, that also happens. That is incest. So, actually,
lust has no limits to where it can go. So, all-devouring. Once, lust gets
triggered. Then, in many cases, for lust, nothing remains sacred. Nothing
remains sacred. So, for lust, when nothing remains sacred. Anything can happen.
And n..., n..., there can n..., ha..., perverse fantas..., perverse fantasies
which people have. You know. So, you know, these can make "mahāśano mahā-pāpmā".
So, lust leaves nothing sacred. Lust devours everything. So, "maha". That is why
I said. "mahasano maha-papma". It is the "viddhy enam iha vairinam". So, we see
today in the world, you know, sexual assaults, and sexual abuse, rapes, and
everything surrounded with that is such a big problem. It all originates in
lust. And when it originates in this way, you know, it is, it is, so, quite
s..., you know, sad that people are not able to see the link between what they
are looking at eagerly in the media, and what they are looking at, horrified in
the news. What does it mean?

You know, sometimes, in the advertisements, in the billboards, in the movies,
there is so much sexuality being explicitly promoted. That means, you know that
there are sexually, hmm, ob..., there are obscene pictures, revealing pictures
with, of male-female sexuality. And then, you know, there are w..., there
incidents, which are reported in newspapers of, of people being, you know,
perversely violent. And people become victims. And people look forward to that
kind of d..., depiction in the media. And they are horrified. How can you do
that? It is, but actually, the same force. Same lust that is being triggered
through tho..., those kind of holdings, those kind of pictures. Then, when it
gains our deadly momentum, it becomes like this. So, most people may say, oh,
no, no, no. Actually, the movies are depicting romantic, consensual sex. So,
con..., you know, that they say, you know, boy, both men and women, they are
attracted. Which is, are, they are doing everything vountarily. But here, what
is happening, it is, it is forcible. It is not, and it is not at all romantic.
It is brutal. Yeah. And they may say that, you know, that is something good.
This is something bad. You know, that is, you know, that is, that, there is
a difference the two, no doubt. But the point is, that reference can be
understood when a person is not blinded by lust. Once that person becomes
blinded by lust, then lust does not see all these differences. Lu..., once lust
is triggered. And then, it can just transmogrify into ugly forms which people
cannot even think about, most people. So, of course, if people have culture.
People have morality. Then, may, most people may not go from m..., m...,
romantic, consensual to a forcible, brutal things. But there, actually, most
people have too much a, too much of a positive self-image. You know, h, I will
never do such things. Well, actually, lust does not respect our moral boundaries
most of the times. So, we have to be careful. You know, Ajamila, when he just
saw, well, passing by, saw that image. Saw that shudra and shudrani embracing.
If somebody had told him before that, you know, you know, you know, after one
week, you will be throwing out your wife from your house. You will be throwing
out your parents from your house. And you will be cohabiting with a prostitute.
You know, the shudrani said, what nonsense? You know, in today's time, if
somebody says like that, a person says, I will do a libel case against you. How
can you speak something like this to me? Ajamila would never have thought I
would ever do something like this. But then, once that lust came, just
devastated him completely. So, therefore, you know, lust is "iha vairiṇam". It
is the enemy of the world. So, it is an enemy. And Krishna says that this is the
enemy which impells us to act sinfully. Now, normally, when we think of an
enemy. We think of somebody with a gun. You know, there is a, our country is
there. Some other country is there. And the enemy is attacking from the border.
Or maybe, they are coming by fighter pilots. Or nowadays, we may see some masked
people with, you know, suicide bombers. You said, we will think of that side of
people as enemies. So, when the question comes up, if, lust, say, lust is an
enemy, what kind of enemy is that? Krishna, Aryan..., Arjuna, they are on a
battlefield, and the enemies they are seeing, Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana, Karṇa, they
are the, Karṇa is not there right now. But Karṇa is very much there in the minds
of everyone. So, they are all there on the battlefield. You know, Dur...,
Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana, you can see. So, what kind of enemy is this? And how does
this enemy attack? So, that Krishna explains in the next verses. So, He gives
three examples here to illustrate how lust covers a person. 

        dhūmenāvriyate vahnir
        yathādarśo malena ca
        yatholbenāvṛto garbhas
        tathā tenedam āvṛtam

So, "dhūme" is by smoke. "āvriyate". "āvriyate" is covered. "vahnir" is fire.
So, just as smoke is covered by fire. "yathādarśo malena ca". So, "darśaḥ",
"ādarśaḥ" is, you know, mirror. That when, which we can get "darsah". You know.
"adarsah". That is mirror. And "malena ca". "malena" is dirt, dust. Just as dust
covers a mirror, "yatholbenavrto garbhas". "ulbena" is the womb. "garbhas" is
embryo. So, just as the womb covers the embryo. Similarly, "tatha tenedam
avrtam". Similarly, "tena". "tena" is, refers to that. You know. That lust.
"idam". This. That is a, soul is covered. "tenedam avrtam". So, it is giving
three examples of how lust covers the soul. So, let us look at these three
examples now. Yeah. So, Prabhupada explains in the purport. And Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura also elaborates this in his commentaries, Rasika Ranjana and Vidvat
Ranjan. So, what does he say over here? The first, you know, analogy is, this is
fire covered smoke. So, this refers to the human species. So, what is the nature
of the covering? It is thin and penetrable. It means, when smoke is there, just
phew, phew, phew, just blow and then proper stroking, the, you know, f..., this
can be moved aside. But then when du..., dust is there in the mirror, then that is
considered to be the covering in animal species. Now, sometimes, the dust may be
so much that one cannot, you know, practically see the mirror, only. 21:41
