Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d3ypiHCuu9I
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=w4TtjqEIl72mVIj-3qLt7cJc1xZ8MTU0ODQ4NzcwN0AxNTQ4NDAxMzA3&v=d3ypiHCuu9I&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_065_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_03_Text_33_to_36_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course, Bhagavad Gita. We are
doing the third chapter. We have completed till verse 32. So, we have discussed,
let us look at the chapter overview, before we move forward. So, we, this
chapter starts, basically, chapter starts with karma-yoga. And that is the
focus. So, now, Krishna is explaining, we are in the fourth section, now.
Fou..., fourth section, we completed. The difference between Kali-yu...,
karma-yoga and karma-kanda. And now, how karma-yoga elevates. That is what
Krishna is talking about in the fifth section, 30 to 35. So, "mayi sarvāṇi
karmāṇi" was 30th verse. Which says that, actually, offer the fruits of your
work to me. So, it, earlier, it was, karma-yoga was, just be detached from the
work. But now it is, not only to be detached from the work. But also, to focus
oneself on the Supreme Lord. And when one focuses oneself on the Supreme Lord,
offering the fruits of the work to the Supreme Lord. Then, by that, one is able
to, you know, become liberated. And then, Krishna says, have faith. So, when He
says, have faith, at that time, He gives two verses. That either, if you have
faith, then you will be liberated. If you do not have, if that person does not
have faith, then that person will s..., all the efforts will be lost. So:

        sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān
        viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

Now, Krishna will continue the theme of talking about dovetailing the one's
nature and doing one's prescribed duty. Let us look at the verse.

        sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ
        prakṛter jñānavān api
        prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni
        nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati

So, "sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ". So, here, we see, "sadṛśaṁ". "sadṛśaṁ" means.
"sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ". So, "svasyāḥ" is one's own. Acco..., "sadṛśaṁ",
accordingly. "ceṣṭate". "ceṣṭate" means to act. To try. To act. So, everybody
will act according to their nature. "prakṛter", who are even "jñānavān api". So,

        prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni
        nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati

So, "prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni" means all living beings will act according to their
nature. "nigrahaḥ" is repression. "kim karisyati". What will repression
accomplish? What will repression accomplish? So, this seems to be a, a somewhat
confusing verse in the Bhagavad Gita. Because generally, we all say that, you
know, we have wrong desires. And we have to suppress those wrong desires. We
have to get rid of those wrong desires. So, Krishna is telling, what will s...,
repression accomplish? "nigrahah kim karisyati". And He says, everybody will act
accordion to their nature. "sadrsam cestate svasyah". "svasyah". And He is
saying even "jñana" will not help one to, you know, curb one's nature. One will
act accordion to one's nature. So, now, what does Krishna mean here by
"prakrtim"? Th..., understanding that is very important. "prakrtim" here does
not refer to kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada. This is now what He is referring
to by. By "prakrtim", He is referring, actually, to our propensity within the
four varanas. So, brah..., brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, shudra, that cannot be
repressed. See, the Vedic cu..., philosophy, there are two kinds of urges that
come from the contact of the soul with the body. So, some urges are to be
rejected. And some urges are to be dovetailed. So, understanding that difference
is very important if one is to practice spiritual life properly. So, there is
"prakrtim". And there is vasana. Vasana is i..., immoral desire. "prakrtim" is
material nature. So, material nature and material desire. So, m..., m...,
material is innate to our psychophysical nature. So, and it is harmonisable with
dharma. Whereas vasana is material desire. And superficial to our psychophysical
nature. And it is not harmonisable with dharma. What does this mean actually?
What does it actually mean when we say harmonisable or not harmonisable? For a
brah..., for a brahmana, say, person who is intellectually oriented, for that
person to act intellectually is innate, is in...., natural. It is not innate to
the soul. But it is innate to the soul when that soul is embodying in a
particular body. Which has a particular, you know, way of functioning. So, that
is not necessa..., a, a, not, in any way, you know, sinful in itself. On the
other hand, vasana are the desires which are generated by kama, krodha, lobha,
moha, mada, matsarya. So, the brahmanical tendency, or the ksatriya tendency,
that is not generated by kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, matsarya. That is
generated by the contact of the soul with the body. And that is something which
is meant to be dovetailed. It is not meant to be suppressed or rejected. Now, of
course, anybody from a brahmana to a shudra, or even an outcaste. All these
people, they can get infected by kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, matsarya. And
when they get infected by these anarthas, then they may also develop vasanas.
And those vasanas, they h..., will help to decide wh..., how to deal with them.
So, in different varanas, they all have to regulate. But the regulation level
and the regulation method may be different. You know, for a, for a, generally
speaking, a shudra is considered lower. Because the shudra is not so much
capable of regulation, of sense control. And because the shudra is not. So, it
is not that the person is, you know, you know, condemned. You know, if a shudra
had to live like a brahmana, it may seem, oh, brahmanas were respected so much.
And, you know, they, good l..., practically just live a very comfortable life.
You know, others will give charity. And they will just teach. And they do not
have to do any hard work. But along with that, brahmanas have to live a life of
cleanliness and purity. And if a shudra had to live like that, shudra would be
miserable. You know. Why? Because that psychophysical nature is just not suited.

So, here, we are not talking about brahmana, shudra by birth. We are talking
about by qualities. So, therefore, the important point is, that now it is not
that the shudra cannot become elevated. Shudra can also become elevated.
Gradually, by practicing, by, you know, that one's duty in varanashram. And
beyond that, shudra can also be elevated by the practice of, you know, the
devotional service. There, there is a rapid elevation that shudras can also do.
You know.

        kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya
        yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei ‘guru’ haya

So, Chaitanya Mahāprabhu describes, it is in Chaitanya Charitamrita, it is
described that, actually speaking, if a shudra understands Krishna
Consciousness, then the shudra can even become a guru. You know. If he
understands "kṛṣṇa-tattva", then, he, he is worthy of being called a guru. Now,
there are two significant points here. First is the inner understanding. And the
second is the outer position. So, what this verse says is, both are possible for
a shudra. That the shu..., just because that person is born a shudra does not
mean that this shudra cannot get, you know, spiritual understanding of
"kṛṣṇa-tattva". He can. And if he gets that, then that person should be
considered to be as respectable as a guru. So, the point here is that the
varanashram system is based on mut..., just gradual progression. And if somebody
practices devotion, then that is entirely different. Then, that person can make
rapid elevation. So, now, when a shudra becomes a, say, a devotee. Will that
person necessarily give up shudra activities? Yeah. As far as the, sometimes,
shudras engage in some illicit activities. Shudras pander to their lust, anger,
greed. They will not do that. But beyond that, they will practice, you know,
they will practice whatever occupational duties they have. They will not
necessarily give them up just because they are devotees. They may continue those
duties. So, what Krishna is telling over here is that even if a person gets,
becomes "jñanavan". When that person gets knowledge, still, that person will act
according to the nature. So, nature here is not referring to what is impelled by
lust, anger, greed. It is referring to the varanashram nature. The varana nature
basically. So, one will act according to that. And Prabhupada further talks
about in the purport of how the Vedic scriptures offer a program for regulating
ourselves. So, Prabhupada says that:

"There are many so-called spiritualists who outwardly pose as advanced in the
science but inwardly or privately are completely under particular modes of
nature which they are unable to surpass."

So, inwardly or privately. What is the difference between the two? Inwardly
means that they do not express it to anyone. And privately means that they
express it, but in private. That means they all have, they have sinful desires.
Which they try to suppress in their hearts. Or they try to keep it hidden from
public view. And under particular modes of nature, which they are unable to
surpass. And then, Prabhupada says that. You know:

"No one should suddenly give up his prescribed duties and become a so-called
yogi or transcendentalist artiﬁcially."

So, actually speaking, it is better to practice karma-yoga. That is what Krishna
is telling over here. And ultimately, Krishna will say that, you know,
karma-yoga will lead to, culminate in bhakti-yoga. So, Prabhupada is talking
about bhati-yoga over here. So, it is better to be situated in one's position.
And act according to one's nature. But offer the fruits of one's work to
Krishna. And practice devotional service. So, you know, the whole thrust of the
verse is that one should act according to one's nature. Because one should not
try to suppress one's nature. That will not a, a, that will not lead to any
good. Now, there are some organisations which actually distort this verse. And
they say, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". That they make like the essence of the
Bhagavad Gita. So, the essence of Bhagavad Gita is, we could, "sarva-dharmān
parityajya mām...", "maha-baho". Those are the verses. Or Catur-sloki Bhagavad
Gita in the 10.8 to 11. Rāmānujācārya says "sarva-dharmān parityajya". It is its
germ sloka, you know, just, mo..., summit verse of the Gita. So, these are
the verses that our ācāryas have described as the most important in the Gita. But
there are these, you know, you know, you know, pseudo-spiritualists. They are
materialists in spiritual garb. And they say that the essence of the Bhagavad
Gita, the most important, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". Therefore, there is no need
to repress.  Whatever be your desire. Indulge in that desire. Indulge in that
desire. And by indulging in that desire, you will enjoy. And is a "nigrahah kim
karisyati". So, these people are completely, you know, misleading everyone.
Because we will see, just a f..., you know, you know, now, we can un..., refute
this understanding of the Bhagavad Gita in several ways. First and foremost is,
if we go into the context, immediately after this, just two verses later. In the
36th verse, Arjuna will ask, what, by what one is impelled to sin? And implied
in that is, you know, qu..., the further question, how can one control that
sinful tendency? And then, Krishna, from 37 to 43 gives an elaborate answer,
where He describes how one can control that propensity. And essentially, what He
says there is, one controls by the practice of, you know, you know, intelligence
and sense control. So, sense control internally and intelligence to situate
oneself on the spiritual platform. But the whole point is that Krishna says, one
has to control that sense control propensity. So, if this verse were a l...,
l..., license or a mandate for unrestricted enjoyment, then why would Arjuna ask
the question by what is one impelled towards sin? Because this verse would then
become, you know, the s..., as a mandate for all kinds of enjoyment, even sinful
enjoyment. So, why would Arjuna have any apprehension of what causes one sin?
And then, why would Krishna, you know, clearly say that lust is our eternal
enemy? "nitya-vairiṇā". And Krishna will say that, control it. Curb this lust
Krishna says. "jahi śatruṁ mahā-bāho". Lust is your enemy. And conquer over it,
Arjuna. "kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam". He says in 3.43. So, th..., if we look at the
context, this interpretation of the Bhagavad Gita, a, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati"
as a license for unrestricted enjoyment, it is a completely unwarranted, you
know, statement. It does not at all support that interpretation. Further,
"nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". As I said, if we look at the context, it is more
talking about the "prakṛtiṁ". It is talking more about, according to our nature,
we should act. So, i..., Arjuna, you have a ksatriya nature. And trying to act
artificially like a sannyasi is not going to work for you. So, you, what will
repression accomplish, oh, Arjuna? Therefore, act according to your nature. And
even the wi..., even the learned will act according to their nature. So, now, we
may wonder, is it possible to transcend one's nature entirely? For us, do we
need to transcend our nature, also? And is it possible to do it? The important
point is that we stay engaged in a way that we are, that is productive for our
devotional service. Productive means productive in the sense that we are
internally satisfied. We feel comfortable doing the services that we are doing.
And externally, we are competent. That we are good at doing a particular
service. So, if we are doing it that way, then, we do not have to bother whether
I have to transcend my varana or not. Occasionally, by the course of events in,
you know, you know, life itself. We will sometimes, we f..., thrust into
services which we are not comfortable doing. But we are thrust into those
services, at that time, we have to fight. And we have to control ourselves. So,
we may have to do those services temporarily. But in general, we, you know, is,
to, we search for, and find the engagement that, you know, i..., we are
comfortable with internally and we are competent externally.

Sometimes, devotees have the idea that doing the thing that I do not like to do,
that is surrender. You know. I do not like to do something, so when I do that,
then, therefore I am proving my surrender to Krishna. Now, it is a, generally
speaking, it is a mistaken sentiment. No. It is not that we have to prove our
surrender to Krishna by making ourselves miserable. Krishna does not want to us,
to make u..., make us miserable. Krishna actually wants us to be happy. The
important point is that we should not identify ourselves with our nature so
completely that we think our current material nature is our eternal natural. So,
that should not happen. So, therefore, we have our sadhana. And the sadhana is
standard. Whether a person is, you know, whatever the service person is doing.
But that person continues doing sadhana. And that is standard universal for
everyone. But beyond that, we all have our i..., specific individual services.
And we do those services. And by that, we slowly, steadily advance in spiritual
life. Now, beyond this, if we look at the overall picture of today's world. None
of us know what is our varana. You know, Some of us may, most of us, generally,
we cannot just determine our varana by the way, by the particular family in
which we are born. And even if we are born in that particular family, you know,
we do not really have always engagements that are according to our varanashram
propensities, a..., according to our traditional varanas. That means sometimes a
person may be born in a brahmanical family. But that person may choose by the
peer pressure, by one's own individual ambition, by the social trends, you know,
to beco..., or by financial needs, to become an engineer or a doctor. That
person may not be engaged in a brahmanical way. Sometimes, that person may be
born in a business man's fam..., business per..., family. But that person may
choose not to do business. But to do something else. So, that will vary. So, we
do not have to assume, you know, that this particular thing is my varana. We
will have to often go through a process of individual self-discovery. You know,
individual self-discovery means that we talk of self-discovery at one level that
we discover ourselves as the soul. That is important. No doubt. But there is
second self-discovery that is also required. That is ourselves, a discovery. Who
am I? In terms of what is my psychophysical nature? Yes, I am a soul. But I am
a soul in a particular kind of body. And in the body that I am, how can I best
serve Krishna? So, this is something, you know, which each of us has to
discover. Now, of course, in today's society, most people work in such a way
that, you know, I just want some job. You know. I have to earn a living. And I
need to have some job. So, if that, if one is in entire financial straits, or
one is in some institution where one is required to do some particular job.
Then, that is ok. But overall, the Vedic culture is that people are engaged
in accord with their propensities. So, we may have to individually find out what
are our propensities. And even in material life, sometimes, people feel that
they are having job. They, they do not have job satisfaction. That is because
they feel that, actually, my job is not according to my nature. It may be also
that they are not getting sufficiently paid. Or they have a hostile work
environment. You know. Or whatever. Other factors can be there. But one factor
for jo..., you know, absence of job satisfaction can also be that, their job is
not compatible to, with their nature. So, that depends, will depend on the
individual. Whether one is, one is having a reasonably good career. Whether one
will try to change that to work according to one's nature. Or whether one will
continue according to that. And just focus on practicing spiritual life. And
transcending, you know, what is one, whatever one's varana is. So, today, how
things will work out, each of us will have to decide individually. In general,
it is not necessary for devotees to focus on trying to discover their varana too
much. That will be revealed on its own. We have to just, as I said earlier, we
have to disc..., and walk on the journey of individual self-discovery. But that
does not necessarily mean that we have to make that our priority and postpone
our Krishna Consciousness. We focus on practicing Krishna Consciousness and
while doing that, we also observe ourselves. And as we keep observing ourselves,
by that, we learn. You know, how can I best be engaged? So, Krishna is telling
that we will all have a particular nature. And we act according to that nature.
So, "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". What will repression accomplish? Now, I will
discuss more about this in the next verse, also.

        indriyasyendriyasyārthe
        rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitau
        tayor na vaśam āgacchet
        tau hy asya paripanthinau

So, "indriyasyendriyasyārthe". So, "indriyasya" and "indriyasya arthe".
So, "indriyasya arthe" refers to sense objects. Senses and sense objects,
"rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitau". "vyavasthitau" means is situated inside. What is
situated in-between interaction of senses and sense objects? "rāga" and
"dveṣau". Attachment and aversion are situated inside that. "tayor na vaśam
āgacchet". Do not come under their control, oh, Arjuna. Why? "tau hy asya
paripanthinau". These are enemies. You know. "rāga" and "dveṣau" are enemies.
They do not come under their control. Now, "paripanthinau". So, "pantha" is
path. "pari" is thieves. "paripanthinau" is, they are thieves on the path. They
are rubbers who will steal away our spiritual m..., our spiritual inclinations.
Our prospects for spiritual advancement. And our capacity to live according to
our dharma. So, Krishna, if we see, immediately after the previous verse.
Previous verse is "nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati". But then immediately in this verse,
He is saying, you know, "pa...", "ta...", "tayor na vaśam āgacchet". Do not go
completely un..., do not complo..., go under a control. So, is this a contrast?
Contradiction? Previous verse is saying, oh, you cannot repress the nature. But
then, here, He is saying, that, oh, but do not succumb to the nature, also. Do
not go its con..., its control. "tayor na vaśam āgacchet". What is in? What does
He? But here, He is not using the word "prakṛtiṁ". He is using the word, what
should we not go under the control of? "rāga" and "dveṣau". Where is "rāga" and
"dveṣau" situated? It is in senses and the sense objects. So, here, Krishna is
talking, not about "prakṛtiṁ". He is talking about vasana. So, now, w..., a male
may, you know, in the male body and mind, there is situated a..., attraction for
the female form. And in the female body and mind, there is attraction to the
male form, males in general. So, this attraction for males is there in the
senses and the sense objects. "vyavasthitau". It is situated. So, what does one
have to do? So, one has to regulate it. One should not go under the control of
it. So, the..., there is prin..., there is the arrangement of marriage by which
this can be regulated. It, a, can be expressed. But it has to be expressed in
regulation. There has, has to be expression with regulation. If there is no
expression, there is repression. Then, that will not work. That is what the
previous verse is saying. And this verse is saying, but there cannot be
unregulated exp..., expression. So, "rāga" and "dveṣau". So, what is the
"dveṣau"? So, Chakravarti pad, Baladeva Vidyabhushana, the acharyas in their
commentary explain that, you know, the condi..., that the conditioned soul wants
to enjoy sense gratification. Therefore, if the male is attracted to the
females. But if the male is, fi..., you know, if the per..., people find some
sadhus who tell them, do not engage in sense gratification. Then, they feel
"dveṣau" for them. Why are these people interfering with my sense enjoyment? And
they say, I want to go away from them. I want them to get out of my life. I want
to go away from them. So, what happens like this? Both i..., these. This "rāga"
and this "dveṣau". They are "paripanthinau". So, if you succumb to the "rāga",
the attachment. And get carried away by it. Or we succumb to the "dveṣau", and
go away from devotee association. Then, what will happen? "paripanthinau". They
will steal away our opportunity for spiritual advancement. Now, Srila Prabhupada
explains in the purport that, hmm, hmm, Prabhupada starts by speaking about
Krishna Consciousness.

"Those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage in
material sense gratiﬁcation."

Profound statement. So, they are naturally reluctant. You know, actually, most
of us, we are naturally eager to engage in sense gratification. You know, as
soon as we get an opportunity, we want to engage in sense gratification. So, for
us, in the sadh..., in the conditioned stage, you know, she..., hearing and
chanting are our prescribed duties. And eating, sleeping, mating, defending.
These are our favorite pastimes. We look forward to them. When can I do this?
So, but, one who is in Krishna Consciousness, Prabhupada says, they are
naturally reluctant. Why? Because they have exp..., they have experienced a
higher happiness. And as compared to that higher happiness, this happiness seems
so insignificant. Why should I lose the opportunity for higher happiness by
exp..., by getting entangled in these lower pleasures? So, they are naturally
reluctant. But those who are not in such consciousness, Prabhupada writes:

"should follow the rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures"

And now, Prabhupada talks about how sex relationships will be regulated to the
marri..., marriage itself. And then, he makes another point:

"As long as the material body is there, the necessities of the material body
are allowed, but under rules and regulations. And yet, we should not rely upon
the control of such allowances."

So, now, you know, what does it mean? We should not rely upon the control of
such allowances? That means if there are, there is a control. Ok. That means
o..., say, there is the scripture. For example, there is dharma. And dharma,
even, there is dhar..., say, marriage. So, one relies on the control of
marriage. Yes. Now, that I am married. Now, I will not fall prey to sinful
activities. Yes. Ma..., marriage creates a sort of, you know, protection for
ourselves. But at the same time, if one, you know, does not understand that the
purpose of marriage is not just sense gratification. The purpose of marriage is
for both the sou..., a, people, the male and the female to come together and
serve Krishna. So, if that purpose is forgotten, then, you know, that marriage
itself can become just a fuel and arrangement that fuels one's l...,
sense-gratificatory desires. And then, what may happen is that the desires may
become so great that they may burn away one's intelligence. And one may no
longer follow the dharmic restriction, also. So, Prabhupada says in the purport,
that, there, they, that just as there can be accidents even on royal road. So,
he is referring to royal road as the arrangement provided by shastra for gradual
purification. But even if there is a royal road, there is always the possibility
for accident. You know, similarly, even when one is following the regulative
principles, one should not assume that the regulative principles themselves will
protect me. Yes, they will offer us a safe guard. But at the same time, we have
to recognise what is the, what is it that we have to guard against? What is it
that we need safety from? You know. So, if we start indulging in that unlimitedly,
unrestrictedly, then as these desires start blazing more and more, then the
safeguard will no longer guard us. Because it will, it is not that safeguard is
incapable of guarding us. But we will no longer want that guardianship. You
know, that guard. We will knock it as the, q..., the desires will blaze up so
much that they will knock out all the safeguards. And then, one may have an
accident on the royal road, also. That means one may be intending to practice
dharma. But one may get, one may not be able to practice it. So, now, here,
Prabhupada makes an interesting point that:

"sex enjoyment is a necessity for the conditioned soul, and sex enjoyment is
allowed under the license of marriage ties."

So, now, the wording is very significant. Is it a necessity for whom? It is not
a necessity for the soul itself. It is not necessary for the regulated soul. It
is a necessity for the conditioned soul. Now, what do we mean here by necessity?
So, is it an absolute universal necessity for everyone? Actually, you know, the
word necessity here refers not to a physical necessity. It refers to
psychological necessity. You know, it is not that if a person does not engage in
sex, the person will die. The sex is not a necessity on the level of food. Or
sleep. Hmm. Food, clothing, shelter. We say these are the necessities. So, food,
sleep. These are absolute necessities. Water is a necessity. Without water,
without food, we cannot live. We will die. So, it is not that the person without
se..., you know, that person can, will die without sex. But for most people, it
is a necessity in the sense that what is actually psychological necessity is so
irresistible that it is essential. So, in that, that is why, generally, the
renounced order, and the people are few. You know, in society, not everybody can
be renounced. And not everybody needs to be renounced. It is, that is for few
people who will renounce the world. And they will practice spiritual life
focusing entirely on their vertical relationship with Krishna. And, you know,
for them, is it not a necessity? Well, if they are purifying themselves. If they
are getting satisfaction at the spiritual level, then it is no longer a
necessity. Because th..., ultimately what is a necessity is happiness. So, if
one gets happiness at the spiritual level, one will not need happiness at the
material level. But for most people, to experience happiness at the spiritual
level in a steady and fulfilling way requires substantial purification which may
not be possible in the initial stages of one's spiritual life. That is why
dharmic marriage is what is prescribed for most people. And the renounced order
is there for those people who want to focus primarily or exclusively on their
relationship with Krishna. Now, "tayor na vasam agacchet". Prabhupada writes
that, he concludes with a nice way. In the purport, he says:

"no one should try to be detached from Krsna consciousness at any stage of life.
The whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of sense attachment is ultimately
to become situated on the platform of Krsna consciousness."

So, detached meant, from that people feel, oh, all my suffering is because of my
attachment. No. Actually, our suffering is not because of our attachment. Our
suffering is because of our detachment. You know. How is that possible?
Actually, we are all detached from Krishna. You know, we are all parts of
Krishna. But we have become detached from Krishna.

        mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

We are all parts of Krishna, but we have become detached. You know. We have
become separated from Krishna. And because we have become separated from
Krishna, that is why we are suffering now. So, we all want to become connected
with Krishna. The purpose of bhakti is not primarily to develop detachment. It
is to rectify our detachment from Krishna by reviving our attachment to Him. So,
when we be develop attachment to Krishna, then that attachment to Krishna will
give us so much satisfaction, that our material attachments fall away. So, we
should not b..., b..., be too much conscious or troubled by our material
attachments. Even if we have material attachments. Now, our focus should be on
developing our sa..., devotional attachment to Krishna. That is the essential
process of bhakti. However much we struggle in our, you know, sadh..., in
sadhana, in our standards. Sometimes, we may struggle. We may fall. And we have
to understand that even if we fall. Still, we have to go on in devotional
service. Sometimes, after we fall, we may feel guilty. And when we feel guilty.
We think, oh, I am good for nothing. I am so fallen. I cannot practice spiritual
life. And that guilt may eat us up internally. So, actually, if I chanting Hare
Krishna. He says. Oh. Oh, I am so fallen. I cannot get purified. I have been
chanting for so long. Nothing is happening. What is the use? So, we may start
thinking like this. You know, even guilt could well be a temptation. You wonder,
how can guilt be a temptation? Actually, temptation is not only that which, say,
promises material pleasure. Temptation in a broad sense is anything that takes
us away from Krishna. So, if, you know, with, say, say, lust or an..., ang...,
greed, it takes us away Kr..., by, away from Krishna, by promising pleasure. Oh,
you will enjoy. Guilt keeps us away from Krishna by creating a wall between us.
Oh, I am so fallen. I can never become purified. What can I do? What is the use?
So, ultimately, when we are, feel guilty, we are becoming self-centered. And if
we are becoming self-centered, then we are not Krishna-centered. We are not
Krishna Conscious. So, just as lest..., lust makes us self-centered. When we
will become lusty. You know, when we feel lusty. Then, what happens is, we can
think only, oh, I and my enjoyment. So, same happens when we feel guilty. So,
guilt, how should we feel guilt? That means, guilt should be as, m..., used to
m..., act as an impetus for K..., moving towards Krishna. So, guilt is like an
internal immune system. That means whenever we get some infection, then there is
fever that comes. So, when the fever comes, then we understand that, oh, there
is some sickness in the body. Now, I have to take some medicine. But if I find
that, when I feel guilty, at that time, I become so disturbed. That I think oh,
I am so sick that the medicine itself is of no use. See, the feeling of sickness
should make us feel the need for the medicine. If the feeling of sickness makes
us feel, oh, the medicine is useless. Then, that feeling of sickness is not
actually guilt. It is pseudo-guilt. It is pseudo-guilt. So, you know, I have
written an article on my website about guilt and pseudo-guilt elaborately. The
essence is that anything that discourages us in the practice of devotional
service, that is pratikul to bhakti. That is unfavorable to bhakti. And that
should be rejected. So, even if it feels like guilt. Oh, I am so fallen. I
cannot practice strictly. What should I do? Just put it aside. Do not bother
about it. Let me practice devotional service.

We see Bhaktivinoda Thakur song..., so many songs about "āmāra jīvana, sadā pāpe
rata,". He says, oh, my, my hard is filled so many sinful desires. I am so
sinful. But what is the conclusion of all his songs? Krishna, I will take
shelter of You. You must deliver me. Apart from You, who can deliver me? You
know, You are my only shelter. So, all his feelings of being very fallen
conclude in a fervent call for Krishna's mercy. He does not conclude by saying,
oh, I am so hopeless. That now, I will stop chanting Hare Krishna. Now, I will
give up bhakti. And I will continue in sense gratification. Why I am so fallen?
There is never this conclusion. So, ultimately, we have to always keep this
governing principle for our bhakti.

        ...

That which is 34:24
