Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b2KXxsY2Dkw
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=HU3bDaiHOeuZ_e_vWHX_ohk9vrl8MTU0ODQ4ODA2NUAxNTQ4NDAxNjY1&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_076_-_Bhagavad_Gita_Chapter_05_Text_08_to_14_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&v=b2KXxsY2Dkw&event=video_description

	sarathyam arjunasyadau, kurvan gitamrtam dadau 
	loka-trayopakaraya, tasmai krsnatmane namah

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now into the Fifth Chapter. We discussed the first seven verses of the Fifth
chapter. This Fifth Chapter. Let us have a quick overview once again before we
move forward. And look at the sections. So, the first section was kal...,
karma-yoga is equal to, but easier than jnana-yoga. Then, we are now discussing
how karma-yoga keeps a person free from bondage. That is second section, seven
to sixteen. But by fixing the mind on atma, karma-yogi stays free from bondage.
So, seventh verse, we discussed was "kurvann api na li...":

        sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā
        kurvann api na lipyate

Let us go to the eigth to nine verse now. These are, two are clocked together by
Srila Prabhupada:

        naiva kiñcit karomīti
        yukto manyeta tattva-vit
        paśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighrann
        aśnan gacchan svapañ śvasan

        pralapan visṛjan gṛhṇann
        unmiṣan nimiṣann api
        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

So, "naiva kiñcit karomīti". "naiva". Certainly not. "kiñcit". Even a little.
"karomi", "iti". I am doing. "karomi" means I am doing. I do. "iti". One does
not think like this. So, one doe..., th..., the "yukto manyeta tattva-vit".
"tattva-vit" is the person who is the knower of the truth. Such a person
"manyeta". Such a person thinks what? That person is well-engaged, does not
think, thi..., you know, thinks that I am not the doer of anything. And what are
the things which are, He is talking about? "paśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighrann". So,
these are actions of the various senses. So, first, there are the senses which
take things in word. And kno..., knowledge acquiring sense. "paśyañ" is seeing.
"śṛṇvan" is hearing. "spṛśañ" is touching. "jighrann" is smelling. "aśnan" is
eating. So, these are the ways in which we take things inside the body. And
then, "gacchan" is going here and there. "gacchan svapañ śvasan". "śvasan".
"svapañ" is, you know, "svapañ" is sleeping, dreaming. "śvasan" is the, m...,
s..., breathing. Then, "pralapan". "pralapan" is talking. "visṛjan" is giving
up. "gṛhṇann" is accepting. So, these are the various ways in which we can take
things inside the body. And send things outside the body. "unmiṣan nimiṣann
api". "unmiṣan" is closing the eyes. Opening the eyes.

        indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
        vartanta iti dhārayan

So, "dhārayan". What does one understand? The, "yuk...", "tattva-vit", the
person one is a knower understands that simply the senses are coming in contact
with the sense objects. Nothing more is happening. So, actually, you know, what
is Krishna telling over here? That the wise person understands that when so many
things happen with the body, I am not actually the doer of those things. We may
think I am the body. For example, I think I am speaking right now. And I am
using this body for doing various things. Now, at one level, it is true. I am
speaking. But that is hardly the complete picture. You know, a, modern scien...,
we will understand this at different levels. We will first understand at a
scientific level. Then, we will understand it at a philosophical level. So, if
we look at scientific level, you know, in the body, there i..., there are
different kinds of activities that happen. So, there are some activities which
we do consciously. For example, now, I want to s..., you know, explain something
with an expression, then I will raise my hand. Or I will move my hand. These
are a, things which I do consciously. And then, there is something which happen
unconscious..., subconsciously in the body. For example, while I am speaking, I
do not forget to breathe. You know, I, I, it is not that I have to remember to
f..., breathe. It is just that it happens subconsciously. So, now, you know,
there are various kinds of diseases in the body. Where sometimes in so..., in
some people because of some brain damage or some nervous tissue damage. The
nervous system damage. The peop..., the people, there, there, whatever is
happening, you know, involuntarily in the body. That, they do not, they cannot
make it happen. That means whatever happens involuntarily in the body, they, you
know, it does not happen involuntarily. They have to do it consciously. For
example, there is a disease. When people, you know, they, they stop breathing.
If they are not conscious about it. That will consciously remind. Oh, I have to
breathe. And this, these people, whenever they fall asleep, you know, they will
die of, you know, breathlessness if they swal..., fall asleep. Because their
body in a sense, because of some damage to the, a, a, nervous system, the sys..,
ped..., the involuntarily nervous system. They just, the body forgets to
breathe. It is a nightmarish kind of disease. That the person just cannot sleep.
And there are, in some cases, people, they, they have to, every time they sleep,
they have to put in artificial neural system, artificial respiratory system. And
only then, they can breathe. And similar, the aritificial respiratory system, if
it does not work, then the body will forget to sleep. And they will, in their
sleep, only, they will die. And no one will come to know about them, only. They
will, so, not realise it at all. So, now, resea..., researchers have found out
that if we had to be consciously aware so that the various bodily functions
could happen, then we would have such an overload on our brain that we would
become dysfunctional. We would not be able to do anything. For example, when we
eat food, we do not, you know, we may have to remind ourselves, ok, I have to
chew it. Like that, also happens most of the time con..., a, subconsciously
only. And generally, if we forget it, we will just gulp the food down very fast.
We will not be very conscious of its taste. But either way, the food goes down
the body. After that, what happens? After that, nobody knows what happens
actually? We do not know at least. Some researchers may know. But now, if we had
to remember, oh, now, the food is going down the alimentary canal. Now, of, the
alimentary canal has to compress. Then, it has to expand. Then, it has to
compress. Then, it has to expand. And then, a, the, when the appropriate
reactions have to happen in the stomach. If we had to be conscious of all these
things, we would not be able to be conscious of anything else in life. You know,
if we had to be conscious about breathing, about digestion, about blood
circulation. Oh, heart, now, you must beat. Now, compress. Now, expand. Now,
compress. Now, expand. And that is how the blood will go all over the body. Now,
if we had to be conscious of all these things, we would have a tremendous
overload on our brain. You know. So, it is a great relief that we do not have to
be conscious about all these things. But how do these things happen? So, I
understand the, they, this automatically happening. Actually, we discussed
earlier how automatically simply means that we do not know who is in control and
how that, how that control is happening. But that doe..., a, it does not mean
absen..., automatically does not mean absence of control. Automatically simply
means absence of awareness of control. You know. Absence of awareness of
control. So, who is controlling? Actually, it is, Supersoul is controlling.

        mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

"mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ. So, actually, even through sci..., a, "maya...", that
is, refers to 9.10 in the Bhagavad Gita where Krishna says I am the controller.
So, in this way, if we think deeply, there is so much in our own body that is
happening that is not a..., a..., although it is necessary for it to be done so
that the body can function, but it happens without our conscious awareness. So,
we are not even aware of it. In fact, you know, we eat food. And we enjoy the
taste if it is good. And we curse the taste if it is bad. But afterwards, who
does the digestion? You know, actually, the only time we think about our
digestion is when it does not work. You know, my stomach is upset today. Why is
the ups..., stomach upset? So, practically, the only time we think about
digestion is when it does not work. But at other times, when the digestion does
work, at that time, what happens? We do not even think about it. So, who is
doing all this? It is not actually we who are doing it. You know, so, with
respect to these things, we can say that, I am not the doer. 08:33
