Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xZmJpZWf4
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=W5xZmJpZWf4&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_154_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_04_%26_05_-_Bhakti_surpasses_liberation_%26_is_independent_of_everything_materialcut_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=7i1OVgF_wuS2iqa0JR2eYyiLYdN8MTU0ODQ5MDQ1M0AxNTQ4NDA0MDUz

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhagavad, to the Bhakti Shastri course. In the
"Nectar of Devotion". In the previous class, we disussed about the eligibility
of devotional service. We discussed "kanistha". "madhyama". And "uttama". And
now, we move forward. So, before we move forward, we would like to discuss one
topic related with eligibility. That the important point in the process of
bhakti is recognising that we have a particular "adhikāra" based on our taste.
Our attraction towards Krishna. And attraction towards Krishna is not just
something sentimental. That, oh, how much do I speak about the esoteric pastimes
of Krishna? You know. How much am I always in, you know, you know, Vri..., the
mood of Vrindavan? That is all good. But actually, we see there were many
disciples of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. Who were living in
Vrindavan. But, or in Mayapur. And they did not fulfill the instruction of
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. They did not venture out from the holy dham to
travel all over the world to share Krishna Consciousness. You know. It was Srila
Prabhupada who took that mandate. It was Srila Prabhupada who had faith that
Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's prophecy will come through. And not just will come
through. Sri Chait..., Srila Prabhupada took it as his responsibility to make
that prophecy come through. So, you know, the advancement, the, when we talk
about taste, the, the taste is not just something superficial. The taste is not
just, oh, I, I think about esoteric pastimes of Krishna. Kind of pastimes which
nobody has heard. And that taste is a sign of advancement. Actually. The, when
we talk about taste, you know, it is taste to serve and please Krishna. You
know. And speaking Krishna Katha in a way that will please Krishna. You know.
If, you know, if we speak advanced pastimes of Krishna, and the, all that we think
about conju..., intimate conjugal pastimes of Radha and Krishna, and then that
increases material desires in the people. Then, is that really helping those
souls come to close to Krishna. Will that really be pleasing to Krishna? What
Srila Prabhupada did, it was, he spoke the necessary message. When Srila
Prabhupada said, my purports are my devotional ecstasies. What did he mean? You
know. A devotee's ecstasy is not self-centered. It is Krishna-centered. That
means that which gives Krishna ecstasy, a devotee, for that devotee, Krishna,
you know, that, for that, that is the source of a devotee's ecstasy. So, what
will give Krishna ecstasy is when the souls, who are far away from Him, come
close to Him. So, whatever obstacles are there. Whatever misconceptions are
there, if we remove those misconceptions, then that will enable the souls to
come closer to Krishna. So, the, when we talk about who is an advanced stage.
Who is a "madhyama-adhikāri"? Who is an "uttama-adhikāri"? You know. That should
be based on how much that person has comitted to the service of Krishna. And
Srila Prabhupada had that kind of extraordinary, unparalleled commitment. And
that is how in an old age, he was ready to travel all over the world. You know.
Sharing Krishna Consciousness with the peop..., people. And then, you know,
Srila Prabhupada's followers, within ISKCON, are also doing the same thing. In
their own, according to their own capacity. According to their "adhikāra". So,
sometimes, you know, some people, they say, oh, in ISKCON, you do not talk about
advanced Gaudiya-tattva. Oh, you do not talk about rasa-tattva. You do not talk
about raganuga-bhakti. You do not talk about this. You do not talk about that.
And they try to min..., in, denigrate. Or minimise. No. The important point is
to recognise that what is appropriate for people that is talked about. And as
devotees advanced, you know, as devotees advance, you know, they will naturally,
you know, understand what they need for their nourishment. And they will seek
that. Prematurely jumping to advanced, you know, s..., topics is not necessarily
a sign of advancement. Most often, it is not a sign of advancement. Often, it is
a sign of, actually, arrogance. That one thinks that one is qualified. When one
is not qualified. At one time, the devotees in ISKCON, you know, some of the
devotee leaders, they formed a group. And they started focusing on the esoteric
pastimes of Krishna. And they called themselves as the "Gopi Bhava Club". They
say, no, we, ultimately, our goal is to develop "Gopi Bhava". So, they started
discussing about those pastimes. So that they will develop the "bhava" with the
"gopis". When Prabhupada came to know about it, Prabhupada was quite annoyed.
He was outraged in fact. And he said, you know, first, we have to, you know,
first, we have to become qualified. Otherwise, we will misunderstand these
things.

And Srila Prabhupada, it was not that he did not want devotees to advance to
higher levels. But he wanted them to move gradually to those higher levels.
Progressively. So, the, Srila Prabhupada was "uttama-adhikāri". And one who
follows his footsteps will also become elevated. You know. One who follows his
instructions. Sorry. Not exactly footsteps. Nobody can follow Srila Prabhupada's
footstep entirely. You know. What he has done is unparallel. Even if somebody
becomes a very great preacher. Still, Prabhupada is the first person who has
spread Krishna Consciousness all over the world. And he has done that. So, he
has done that all alone single-handedly. Without any institutional support. At
least, that is how he has started. So, Srila Prabhupada's instructions, if we
follow, we will all make spiritual advancement. And those who have followed his
instructions for 20, 30, 40 years, they have also made a lot of spiritual
advancement. And under their guidance, we can all, you know, chart the pack,
path back to Godhead. So, you know, whatever our advance subjects, they will
come. We should not think that, just because somebody has the taste for
speaking. Radha Krishna lila, that itself makes a person spiritually advanced.
No. The spiritual advancement of a teacher is based not, is based on how much
that person wants to please Krishna. And Krishna will be pleased when one speaks
appropriately according to the level of the audience. Now, in the next chapter,
we will move forward to, in "The Nectar of Devotion".

In, this chapter is entitled "Devotional Service Surpasses All Liberation". Now,
actually, this chapter is entirely, you know, set off quotations. Now, all that
is mentioned, there are various quotations which talk about, you know, a devotee
does not desire liberation. But a devotee instead desires simply to love and
serve Krishna. You know. So, Prabhupada now, for example, quotes "Pṛthu
Mahārāja". And, you know, you know, you know, he is offering prayers to the
Lord. You know. The Lord has appeared before him. You know. When, you know, his
hundred thou..., he decides to, you know, forego doing the hundred fire
sacrifice at the instruction of Brahmaji. And then, what happens? He is telling,
my dear Lord, I do not want liberation. Because:

“if after taking liberation I have no chance of hearing the glories of Your
Lordship,"

Then, I do not want that. On the other hand, what I want is:

"I shall simply always pray unto Your Lordship that You may give me millions of
tongues and millions of ears, so that I can constantly chant and hear of Your
transcendental glories.”"

You know. You know. So, here, you know, "Pṛthu Mahārāja" gives a very important
reason why, you know, you know, a devotee does not want liberation. Because in
liberation, there is no opportunity to serve Krishna. The:

        dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti
        vinā mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ

In "Kapiladeva"'s prayers, in "Kapiladeva"'s instructions, "Kapiladeva" also
tells this that he gives the list of the five kinds of liberations. And then, he
says "dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti". That even if that is given to such a person, given
to a devotee, the devotee does not accept it. Why? Because in that, "vinā
mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ". So, if there is no service for me available in this, then
the devotee does not accept it. So, of course, in one of the liberations,
"sāyujya". When we merge into Krishna. There is no opportunity for service. And
devotee certainly does not want that. But there are other liberations.
"sālokya". "sārṣṭi". "sāmīpya". "sārṣṭi". So, "sālokya" means living on the same
abode as the Lord. "sāmīpya" is living in close proximity of the Lord. "sārūpya"
means having the same form as the Lord. And "sārṣṭi" is having the same opulence
as the Lord. So, these are all different kinds of liberations. And they
"sāyujya". "sāyujya" is merging with the Lord. So, most often when the word
liberation is used by people, you know, it, they have the connotation of
impersonal liberation. That means "sāyujya". Merging into the Lord. And in
"sāyujya", when one, in the names of merging, then there is, you know, you know,
no chance for, you know, service over there. Now, in the other forms, of
liberation, there is a possibility of service. You know. But, if one gets those
other forms of liberations, without the opportunity for service, then it is said
that the pure devotee does not want this at all. So, cer..., certainly, the pure
devotee does not want "sāyujya". And he does not want other forms of liberation,
also, if the opportunity for service not great, is, is not there. And that is
why it, "Pṛthu Mahārāja" is saying that I want to serve. And how do I want to
serve? Serve with my senses. You know. I want to make, ears and tongue, you
know. tongues and ears. So that I can glorify you. I can hear you glories.
Relish your glories. You know. This is the mood of a devotee. So, you know,
liberation is considered to be the pinnacle of spiritual achievement. By many,
many imper..., many spiritualist. And by the impersonalists especially. And,
you know, you know, the idea that, you know, bhakti is greater than "mukti". Or,
bhakti, you know, yeah, bhakti is greater than "mukti". It is, you know, to many
people, it is quite scandalous. In fact, they feel, oh, mukti is the greatest.
How can bhakti mean greater? In fact, we see that, you know, when Sri Chaitanya,
in Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes. Or in Chaitanya-lila, not exactly Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu's pastimes, there is "Haridasa Thakur"'s pastime with, you know,
"Gopal Chakravarthy". And "Haridasa Thakur" said that just by the preliminary
chanting of the holy names, one can get liberation. And he says the real goal,
fruit of holy name is not liberation. Because liberation comes quite easily by
chanting. Actually, it is "prema". Attaining pure love of God. And, you know,
you know, he is, "Gopal Chakravarthy" is brahman. And he was outraged. He said,
liberation is such a great thing. How can you trivialise liberation like this?
And he said that, if I curse you that if, you know, what you have said is not
true, he actually first did a character assassination of "Haridasa Thakur". You
know. There is, there is, there is adhominem attacks. Adhominem means, instead
of arguing again..., against the, countering the argument of the person. We, of,
some, the opponent attacks the character of the person, only. So, that is
considered unethical many times. You know. So, he did adhominem attacks. He says
that this person, he is a "mlecchá". And he is claiming that he knows better
than us brahmanas? And he said, what does this "mlecchá"? The, actually, now, as
we, he was so self-righteous, he even went to the extreme of saying that,
actually, this is a sign of Kali Yuga. That "mlecchá"s are instructing
brahmanas.

And then, he almost spoke like a curse. He said, if what you have said is false,
if the holy name, they, cannot us grant lib..., you know, liberation, then let
your nose fall away. And when he spoke this, actually, there were many great,
you know, learned people over there. And they understood the exalted level of
"Haridasa Thakur". And they cha..., they started, they put their nose, ear, eye,
hands to the ears. And they started, you know, you know, chastising almost
"Gopal Chakravarthy". Now, he was also brahman, He could not just. He just walked
away from there in half. And eventually, after that, what happened, his own nose
fell away. Because what show, about "Haridasa Thakur" was saying, was based on
scripture. Scripture does say this. So, the point where I am discussing this is
that in orthodox soc..., society, orthodox Vedic society. You know. Now, bhakti
is, is it orthodox? Yes, it is orthodox in the sense that it has been going on
for millenia. But the way orthodox society was in India, you know, during
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's times. And before that, also, was that the caste system
was quite deep-rooted. And brahmanas claim, claimed privileges. So, the idea
was, they did not recognise the power and glory of bhakti so much. And their
idea was "mukti" is very great. So, for such people, you know, the idea that
bhakti can be greater than "mukti" is something which is, you know qui..., which
is quite, as I said scandalous. But it is true. That is what the scriptures
tell. And Srila, this is such an important topic to establish that, you know,
"Rūpa Gosvāmī" in the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And Srila Prabhupada, in his
"Nectar of Devotion" devote a full chapter to it. So, this chapter is actually
nothing, but quotes. And this also illustrates the point of:

        nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau

So, you know, let us look at the various quotes briefly. I will not explain all
the quotes. But the, but the sheer fact that has, full chapter has been devoted
to this topic indicates the important of the topic. So, you know, you know, now,
there, Srila Prabhupada says that, "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" talks about "Bharata
Mahārāja". You know. And he says that, he did not, he did not accept material
opulences. And they said what to speak of material opulences? He does not even
care, he:

"does not care even for that liberation which is aspired to by many great sages,
what to speak of material opulences."

So, a devotee has such a higher taste that nothing is, you know, wanted for a
devotee. Neither liberation, nor material opulences. And similarly, "Vṛtrāsura".
You know.

        na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

        na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

So, "na", "apunar-bhavaṁ vā". He says, I do not want anything else. "na
nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ". He says, "na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā".
Then, "yoga-siddhīr". I do not want "yoga-siddhīr". "na". "apunar-bhavaṁ vā". I
do not want li..., "apunar-bhavaṁ" is liberation. I do not want even that. All
that I want is your association. And your service. So, the, here, we see so many
verses. You know. Which illustrate this point. And this is the famous verse.

        nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve
        na kutaścana bibhyati
        svargāpavarga-narakeṣv
        api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ

So, "api tulyārtha". Devotee considers everything material equivalent. So, what
has this got to do with liberation? So, Srila Prabhupada specifies that.

"or, in fact, in any situation whatever"

So, he says, then "na", "na kutaścana". "svarga". "apavarga". "narakeṣu". So,
"apavarga" refers to liberation. They get liberation from material existence.
Why they do not care? Because "nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve". They are completely
devoted to "Nārāyaṇa". And for them, in that devotion to "Nārāyaṇa", there is
such happiness that nothing else is wanted. "nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve". And like
that, there is, Indra is addressing "Diti", also. So, he is tell..., you know,
so, like that, there are verses. Many verses. And then, here, there is famous
verse of "Prahlāda Mahārāja". Then:

"what is the use for you of spiritual emancipation or liberation from material
bondage?"

If, as, if one is:

"always engaged in chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord and always relishing
the nectar of the lotus feet of the Lord, then there is no necessity for any of
these.”

And like that, the quotes go on. You know. We can look at the various quotes.
Then, you know, it is just an imp..., it is impressive compilation. And the
import..., now, it goes out into other books, also. Apart from Bhagavatam. You
know. 15:48
