Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pGlYifI_jOo
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?redir_token=PMhYeEdSty1PNqJgx_uJgUDEvgJ8MTU0ODQ5MDUwMkAxNTQ4NDA0MTAy&event=video_description&v=pGlYifI_jOo&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_156_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_08_%26_09_-_Offenses_%26_Deity_Worship_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. Continuing with  "The
Nectar of Devotion". So, we are discussing the 64 items of devotional service.
And we discussed how there are items which are "pravritti". Things to be done.
And there is "nivritti". Things to be avoided. So, today, what we will be
discussing, we will discuss two Chapters, today. The First Chapter will discuss
about the items to be avoided. So, Srila Prabhupada devotes a full Chapter to
one it..., you know, to the item of avoiding offenses in devotional service.
You know. This itself comprises a major subseque..., sub..., major subject. So,
the word "aparādha". "aparādha" has in its, you know, you know, root,
etymologically, if you go "rādha". "rādha" is related with "Rādhā". So,
"aparādha" is that which takes us away from "Rādhā". "Rādhārani" is the Hladini
potency of Krishna. She is the pleasure-giving potency. "Hladini Shakti". And
when we go away from the "Hladini Shakti", then we do not, we do not experience
any pleasure in devotional service. So, the results of offenses can be manifold.
One, one result is that, when we go away from the "Hladini Shakti". When we do
not experience any taste in bhakti, then because of that lack of taste, we all
need happiness. So, when we do not get happiness in spiritual life, we cannot go
on very long. Then, the material state, state starts propping up. And when
material taste prop up, then we get attracted to those material taste. And
eventually, we may fall away. So, actually, among offs..., offenses, which is
"aparādha". And sins, which is "pāpam". From the bhakti point of view,
"pāp...", "aparādha" is more dangerous than "pāpa". Because when we do
"aparādha", then we go away from Krishna. And we lose the taste in devotional
service. You know. So, "aparādha", generally, "pāpam" and "punya", they are
material. They act at the material level. Of course, it is not that we can do
"pāpam". And nothing matters. "pāpam" also brings its consequences. The sinful
reactions that come up. And "pāpam" takes us towards, you know, you know,
"raja-guna". Or "tama-guna". Which is "anuk...", "anuk...", which is "pratikul"
for bhakti. So, "pāpam" is also harmful. But even more is "aparādha". Because
"aparādha" is directly anti-devotional. And that is why one has to be very
careful about offenses. So, you know, you know, what do we mean by an offense?
Offense means that we basically disrespect that which is to be respected. And
that disrespect arises because we mistake that which is spiritual to be
material. That which is divine to be mundane. And of course, it is not that
Krishna is waiting to find false. You have committed this offense, now, go, I
will make you fall down. Nothing like that. No. Generally speaking, we should
always have a positive attitude that, you know, rather than looking at offenses
as some things to be feared, and to be paranoid about, we look at it positively.
That, you know, that these are guidelines of, you know, things which, I will do
if I am undisrespectful. So, in contrast, if I cont..., cultivate respectful
attitude, then I will no longer commit those offenses. And instead, I will be
able to deepen and strengthen my relationship with Krishna. So, if we look at
the offenses, you know, the primary focus in them is that we treat Krishna
respectfully. Treat Krishna's manifestations respectfully. So, for example, when
we go in front of the deity, so a day, one of the offenses, I will not to read
through the whole list of offenses. We can read through it. It is quite
straightforward. You konw. But I will just discuss some principles.

When we go in front of the deity, it is said that one should not shout and
chastise somebody in front of the deity. So, you know, that is, you know, that
is natural. It is just a way of showing respect to the deity. You know. If, if,
you know, if, say, two children are having a quarrel. Then, they may quarrel.
And if their father, or their grandfather comes over there, then, now, they will
stop their mischievous behavior. And they will be a little bit more sober. That
is the way we show respect to our elders. So, the Supreme Lord is the Supre...,
Supreme Being. He is the king of all kings. So, when we come in His presence,
then we should be at our best behaviour. So, that is the basic principle. The
idea in deity worship is twofold that there are two moods. One is that, when, if
the deity is at home, then we treat the deity as the king, as the owner of the
house. And when the deity is in the temple, we treat the deity like a king. You
know. A king whom we have invited to reside with us. So, that is why in the
deit..., temple, the deity is also offered opulence. As much as is possible. So,
opulent jewellery. Opulent dresses. And then, often, there are huge temples. All
that is, the Lord is the king. And he is being welcomed over there. Now, again,
if we understand this basic principle of being respectful so that we are
remembering Krishna. All these items, their common denominator is:

        smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur
        vismartavyo na jātucit

Always remember Krishna. So, if we are remembering Krishna, then automatically,
we will avoid these offenses. You know. So, you know, at one time, it happened
that when the devo..., one devotee was cleaning, you know, you know, the, you
know, Srila, room of Srila Prabhupada, at that time, that devotee, there was a,
one, at place in the room, photo of Prabhupada. And he just put the photo
Pra..., up, Prabhupada, upside-down. You know. Hang. Hung it on the, it was
supposed to be hung on the wall. And there, it was kept, not on a hung on a
wall, it was kept on a sill. And there, he hung it up. So, then Prabhupada came
and said. No. This is offensive. You know. Prabhupada was, it was not that
Prabhupada was prak..., concerned about his own resp..., how he is respected.
But the idea that when we respect the representative of Krishna, that is the way
we are expressing our Krishna Consciousness. And that is what Krishna sees. And
He wants to give us His mercy. If we are, if we are not being Krishna Conscious,
then why will Krishna increase our Krishna Consciousness? So, if we are actually
seeing a pic..., if, if we are handling the picture of our spiritual master,
then naturally, it is basic sensitivity that, ok, I will keep this picture. How
can we keep a picture upside-down? So, it is natural. So, Srila Prabhupada
was a, considered that offen..., offense. Normally, even when we are carrying
books. If we are carrying books for book distribution, also, you know, we, if
the books have pictures of Krishna, it is as much as possible, we should keep
the book with the picture, vertically up. Not vertically down. That may not
always be practical, if we are carrying hundreds of books. Or something like
that. But if we are traveling, if we are carrying a Bhagavad Gita, then it is
good to keep the Bhagavad Gita with Krishna's picture vertically. Not
upside-down. You know. So, it is, this, you know, prin..., the princi... under
prin..., basic principle in avoiding offenses is just be conscious. And be
respectful. And if we are that way, then we will naturally be able to, you know,
you know, avoid most of the offenses. Now, some of the offenses may seem to be a
little mutually contradictory. For example, it is said, one offense is, one
statement is that, you know, when one sees one's spiritual master, one should
not fail to offer respect to the spiritual master. So, it is that one should
offer obeisanes. You know. And while offering obeisances, one should also chant
the pranam mantra loudly. And not so loudly that we disturb others. But
basically, it should not just be in the mind. That is also a way of, just like
we chant loud. The Hare Krishna mantra. Similarly, aloud, we chant the mantra.
So, that is one principle. That we should not fail to offer glory, praise to
the spiritual master when we see him. Now, other principle is that, you know,
you know, when we are in front of the deities, we shuld not offer praise to
anyone else. So, now, what will happ..., what happens if we see the spiritual
master in the temple hall? Now, do we offer praise to the deity? Do we follow
the second principle? And not offer praise to the spiritual master? Or do we
follow the first principle and offer praise to the spiritual master? So,
actually, it will dep..., it will, Krishna is  "Bhavad grahi". Krishna will see
that attitude. You know. We can see that, okay, the, Krishna is present over
here. Ok, let me not glorify anyone over here. So, therefore, we, I am not
glorifying over there.  That is ok. And, you know, you know, that is ok if we
do. Another way could be that, you know, actually, we see the spiritual master
as the representive of Krishna. The, Krishna's very dear servant. And then, you
know, we glorify the spiritual master as the representative of Krishna. In fact,
that is what we do in Mangala "ārtī". You know. The Managala "ārtī", actually,
it is Krishna who is coming. And giving darshan. But what we are doing is:

        saḿsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-

We are actually glorifying the spiritual master. So, we may wonder, is this the
way to welcome Krishna? That we glorify somebody else? But it is not somebody
else. You know. It is somebody who is dear to Krishna. And what are we
glorifying the spiritual master for? All the verses of the, you know,
"saḿsāra-dāvānala" prayers, they are prayers about how the spiritual master is
so, you know, dedicatedly and gloriously serving Krishna. So, basically, we are
glorifying, you know, Bhakti Devi. You know. Krishna lov..., Krishna, you know,
for Him, "Rādhārani" is very dear. And for the spiritual master, you know, also,
you know, spiritual master is also great bhakta. So, you know, when we are
glorifying the spiritual master, we are basically glorifying, you know, the, the
bhakti of the spiritual master. And thereby, what we are glorifying is bhakti.
And bhakti, glorification of bhakti is very pleasing to Krishna. And in that,
the glorification of Krishna is included. Because Krishna is the object of
bhakti. So, some other principles, for example, say, you know, the other
principles are very simple to understand. When we are in an unclean stage, we
should not go in front of the deities. So, one principle is that, if we have, if
somebody has died in the family, then one should not go, you know, to the
deit..., one should not, you know, go in front of the deities. So, what is the
logic of this? Is, the idea is that there are two "viddhi"s. We have discussed
this. There is, some, some people may say that, actually, when somebody has
died, that is a time when we need consolation. That is the time when we need,
you know, relief. And that is the time we should go to the temple. So, what is
the idea that one should not go to the temple? The primary idea is that when we
are going to Krishna, especially, when we go into the deity manifestation to
serve Krishna. This is, this will largely, primarily applies to those who are
going to directly worship Krishna. As the deity, as the deity's pujaris. So,
when we are going to serve Krishna, we should be fully, you know, available and
attentive to serve Krishna. And just as there can be physical contaminations if
we are unclean. Similarly, there can be emotional contaminations when we are
distracted by grief. So, if we are distracted by grief, we cannot offer the
proper service to Krishna. And that is why, especially, one should not do the
pujari service. And regarding, going to the temple, you know, or it may depend.
Srila Prabhupada was not very insistent about this. Because in the traditional
society, people, the, almost the whole society had a lot of spiritual culture.
And people could get solace elsewhere. So, you know, if that is not happening,
then if one needs sol..., solace. And guidance. One can go to the temple. And
one may just not go to temple hall. One can, you know, ask the specific temple
devotees about what should do, one do if such a thing happens. But what is the
principle? That we can bhak..., do bhakti in two ways. One is "pañcarātra
viddhi". And the other is the "Bhagavad viddhi". The "bhagavad viddhi" is
centered on hearing. And chanting. And "pañcarātra viddhi" is centered on, you
know, deity worship. So, for "pañcarātra viddhi", there are a lot of rules and
regulations. About how one, something is to be done. How something is not to be
done. And one has to be careful about those rules. You know. But with respect to
"bhagavad viddhi", there are practically no rules. And regulations.

And we see that when "Citraketu"'s son, "Harshashoka" passed away, what
happened?  You know. The sages came over there. "Pārvatī". And "Nārada" Muni.
And they offered solace. How did they offer solace? By, you know, he, by
speaking philosophy. Similarly, when "Srivasa Thakura"'s son passed away, the
devotees continued on harinam sankirtan. And Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, also,
later, when he came to know, he was very touched by "Srivasa Thakura"'s
sacrifice. Doing spirit. That even after his son died, he cou..., allowed the
harinam sankirtan to go on. So, that happened in his home, home, only. Own home,
only. So, the idea is that Krisna's shelter is always available. That shelter is
available. Maybe, not through the "pañcarātra viddhi". It is available through
the "bhagavad viddhi". The "bhagavad viddhi" is focused on hearing. And
chanting. So, that way, the principles that are there for avoiding offenses,
the, you know, the principles are meant so that we are more conscious of
Krishna. And we are able to offer proper service to Him. Now, you know, you
know, as I said, the, you know, the "pañcarātra viddhi" is involving much more
stricter rules than in "bhagavad viddhi". You know. When there is "bhagavad
viddhi". It is hearing. And chanting. So, there are very less offenses in it.
But even then, even in the ho..., chanting of the holy name, also, there are
offenses. And Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport that, you know, you know,
there are actually double, two cautions one has to take. That just becau...,
becau..., so, it is said that if we comit any offenses while worshipping the
deity, if we can, if we chant attentively. And pray to Krishna for forgiveness.
Then, Krishna can forgive the offenses that we have committed while serving the
deit..., worshipping the deity. So, the holy name is far more merciful than the
deity. There is many ways in which the holy name is merciful. First of all,
generally, deity worship, it is only done by brahmana-initiated devotees.
Second, and deity worship, one has to go to the temple to the worship the deity.
The holy name, anyone can chant it. Even ifa  person who is not initiated. When
a person is breaking the principles, can chant it. And the holy name is like a
portable form of Krishna. Deity is not portable. You know. In the early days of
the movement, when Prabhupada got first time, the deities, Jagannath, Baladeva
and Subhad..., Jagannath. Baladeva. Subhadra. They made it. They installed it.
And then, the the evening, Srila Prabhupada came for the temple, take darshan.
And there was no deity in the temple, only. And Prabhupada was shocked. What
happened? He said, Prabhupada, the devotees had to take the deities to the
garden. Not. To through, to the park. You know. There is sometimes devotees in,
in the park. They would do harinam sankirtan. They decided to take the deities
to the park. And Prabhupada rushed. And there, he, practically, in the grass,
only, there, devotees were, placed the deities of Jagannath. Baladeva. Subhadra.
And they were, you know, you know, doing kirtan. So, Prabhupada did not speak
anything over there. Prabhupada was enjoying the kirtans. And then, after that,
you know, then, when the deities were brought back, then, then, then afterwards,
Prabhupada told that, you know, once the deities are installed at a particular
place, they should not be moved. There is only on very special occasions. Like
there are, Rath..., Rath..., Ratha Yatras. Or Yatras. Then, the deities are
moved. And even when those deities are moved, that is also gen..., generally, it
is the Utsava Murtis that are moved. You know. The big deities are normally not
moved. There are smaller deities which are, which are moved in processions. Of
course, sometimes, the big deities are also removed. Like it happens in
Jagannath Ratha Yatra. And sim..., there are Ratha Yatras like that. There are
Yatras like that. For other temples, also. But they are very special occasions.
So, normally, the deity is not portable. The holy name is portable. We can take
the holy name anywhere. And everywhere.

So, holy name is much more merciful. But just because the holy name is merciful.
That does not mean that we should be merciless in deity worship. That means that
it is not that we be careless in deity worship. One thinks that I can do any
offenses. And it is, I just chanting will overcome the offenses. No. If we are
to, actually, chanting attentively, then we will be becoming Krishna Conscious.
And then, we will naturally be Krishna Conscious. While worshipping the deity,
also. And then, we will be properly reverential. While worshipping the deity.
So, that is one aspect. The, the, the, with the bha..., the, the mer..., the
mercifulness of the, you know, deity worship, of the holy name should not be
used as a license to become, you know, lex in deity worship. And secondly, if,
one should not be lax in chanting of the holy names, also. Prabhupada writes
that, you know, offenses to the deity can be removed by chanting the holy names.
But what to happens if we commit offenses to the holy name? You know. Actually,
then, it is quite a serious thing. And one will have to work to remove them. So,
our spiritual progress can become, you know, very slowed if we are offensive. And
that is why, you know, Srila Prabhupada in the temples would have this
regularly. The reciting of the ten offenses. Against the holy name. And, you
know, you know, and the, all these offenses are important. And if we just look
at the principles of, you know, devotional service. 64 items. We will see that,
they will involve, you know, doing activities in a positive sense. Which will
naturally counter the offenses. So, one cannot commit sinful activities. Because
one is practicing devotional service. To under..., to commit sinful activities
on the strength of the holy name is quite a serious offense. Because one
completely misunderstands the purpose. You know. You know. Actually, the
chanting of the holy names is an indication of, is an expression of Krishna's
mercy. There are like verses, you know, say:

        nāmno hi yāvatī śaktiḥ
        pāpa-nirharaṇe hareḥ
        tāvat kartuṁ na śaknoti
        pātakaṁ pātakī naraḥ

That, you know, the holy name can remove more sins than what, you know, even the
most sinful person can commit. You know. So, if somebody says, ok, then I can
commit sins. What else? What is the problem? And I will chant Hare Krishna. And
the sins will be countered. But this is a wrong attitude. See, the idea is that,
Krishna, the promises in the scriptures, sometimes, devotees ask this
questio..., it is said if I do this, then this will happen. This is this, this
will happen. You know. If we just taste once darshan of Jagannath, then one will
liberated. One, do one's, this will happen. That will happen. So, are these
promises exaggerations? Or are they real? Actually, they are real. But they are
real, you know, when actually, the, but the mood we have to understand in that
these promises in the scriptures are expressions of Krishna's merciful heart.
His immense compassion. But, and Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita.

        ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

That as all people surrender to Me, I reward accordingly. So, actually, when we
are approaching Krishna's heart, we have to approach with our heart. So, our,
Krishna's repentan..., our repentant heart, our humble heart, our, you know,
desi..., our repentant means, we have, we have a desi..., we, we regret what we
have done wrong. And we want to reform. So, our repentant heart attracts
Krishna's compassionate heart. You know. If we go with our calculative head, ok,
I will do this sin. But then, I will chant the holy names. And I will counter
the sin. Then, if we are going with a calculative head, then Krishna will also
reciprocate as a calculative head. We have done so many sins. Then, you, you
know, then, you know, have to si..., bear the consequences. So, the point is,
you know, the, the, the, if we look at the mood of the scriptural promises, you
know, it is, in the, for example, at the end of the "Ajāmila" pastime, it is
said, "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" says this. And Prabhu..., "Cakravartī" Pada and Srila
Prabhupada also say the same thing. Similar, say, similar things. The idea is,
is, by one's chanting. And even unconsciously, "Ajāmila" was relieved of si...,
immense sinful reaction. So, then, "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" is, therefore, if one
practices devotional service regularly, then, then, you know, you know, won't
the Lord be merciful? And one be freed from sinful reactions? And then,
Prabhupada says, if we chant 64 round attentively, you know, then won't we be,
then surely we can be confident that the Lord will be deli..., that we will be
delivered from sinful reaction. So, the mood is that there are scriptural
statements. And scriptural promises. And they indicate the extent of Krishna's
compassion. But a devotee does not, a devotee is humble. Devotee does not demand
that this should happen to me. That a devotee sees this, these extraordinary
promises, the devotee takes those extraordinary promises, as, you know, as
inspirations for intensifying one's commitment to the, you know, to the standard
process of devotional service. So, when we do the process of devotional
standard, that means, yes, for "Ajāmila", you know, chanting one name had such a
miraculous effect. So, what are, what we should see, we should not think that,
ok, I will do sinful activities throughout my life. And then, at the end of my
life, I will chant one name. You know. That attitude is wrong. Because, you
know, our goal is not just to somehow, you know, somehow slip into the spiritual
world. You know. That is not the goal. Even if we can slip into the spiritual
world, somehow, that is not, you know, you know, we will not be happy there if
we do not have, if we have, do not develop love for Krishna. Because everybody
there else will be centered on Krishna. And everybody will be talking about
Krishna. And thinking about Krishna. Serving Krishna. And if we have not
developed that attitude, we will not be happy in the spiritual world, also. So,
you know, you know, we have to develop love for Krishna. And when we hear these
extraordinary promises, they indicate the extent of Krishna's compassion. And
the indi..., indicate the, you know, the extent of Krishna's eagerness. That we
come back to Him. And to go back to Him, we try to, we have to develop our love
for Krishna. And we develop our love for Krishna. By, just by committing to the
standard process of devotional service. So, that is how a devotee sees these
promises. That as inspirations to increase our commitment. And our intensity in
the standard process of devotional service. And, and that way, you know, we can
avoid, you know, you know, using the holy name as the rationalisation for
committing sinful activities. So, when we give up these offenses, then we can
make very swift spiritual advancement. Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu says in
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta" that if one can just avoid offenses. And chant. Then, one
can attain the supreme perfection of life. So, this is the, you know, with
respect to the offenses. So, Prabhupada gives many, you know, lot, lot of
offenses list. And then, this, move forward. And we will discuss the next
chapter now.

Next chapter talks about, you know, "Further Consideration of Devotional
Principles". So, the first principle is about "BLASPHEMY". So, Prabhupada gives
one reference. And, you know, you know, then, he says that, there are three ways
of dealing. One is:

"If someone is heard blaspheming by words, one should be so expert that he can
defeat the opposing party by argument. f he is unable to defeat the opposing
party, then the next step is that he should not just stand there meekly but
should give up his life. The third process is followed if he is unable to
execute the above-mentioned two processes, and this is that he must leave the
place and go away."

You know. So, what does this mean? So, we see, especially, you know, you know,
you know, with respect to offenses, you know, in the Six, in the Fourth Canto of
Srimad Bhagavatam when, you know, Daksha offends Lord Shiva. By not having any
place for him. You know. Not ha..., not allocating for him any share in the
sac..., "yajñá". Sacrifices. You know. And sacrifical offerings. Then, the,
co..., you know, Daksha's daughter, who is also "Shiva"'s wife. "Satī". She sees
this. And she feels that her husband has been offended. And she gives up her
life. And, you know, similarly, we see that in the "Rajasuya yajñá" when, you
know, "Śiśupāla" started blasphemying Krishna. There were many kings who walked
away from there. Some kings, some, if it is not possible to walk away, one can
plug one's ears. And one does not hear it. So, then, beyond that, of course, the
best way is that, one answers the questions. Now, here, one also has to be
careful. If somebody asks some dou..., have some doubts. Some questions. You
know. We also have to see, see the attitude. When he is talking about blasphemy.
We should not label any, if you, if somebody just has an inquiry. Even if the,
you know, we should not, if somebody asks, you know, maybe, there has been this
problem. That problem. In ISKCON. We should not say hey, oh, you are
blasphemying. No. If a person maybe have sincere inquiry. So, at that time, one
has to, it, one should not just simplistically label any criticism as blasphemy.
Because sometimes, there is a valid criticism. And, and beh..., behind that
criticism, there may be a motive of wanting to clarify things. So, then, one
should be able to clarify. So, that is why in general, the, the, the second is
not an option which devotees should ever adopt. You know. First. Or the third.
We will, we move away from that situation. We do not hear it. Art, first is that
we hear. We hear. And clarify. You know. You know. We hear what a person is
saying. And then, offer the proper understanding. So that the person gets
clarified. So, especially nowadays, we can become very, you know, susceptible to
hearing blasphemy. Because on the internet, anyone can put anything about
anyone. And then, that just spreads over wide place. And how much is the true
element. How much is the false element. It is very difficult to know in that.
So, that is why we have to be careful. In general, you know, is, you know, we do
not have to go around searching for, you know, gossip on the internet. You know.
If somehow, some may, it, now, but what happens even if we do not go..., sea...,
quo..., searching, people send mass emails. This has happened here. That has
happened there. That has happened there. 24:22
