Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PcPecItobAU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=PcPecItobAU&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_151_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Introduction_and_Chapter_01_-_Uttama_Bhakti_and_Kleshaghni_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=_67743eVJVF6vM36Nd8u8mNqMFN8MTU0ODQ5MDM3NkAxNTQ4NDAzOTc2

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome to our Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavad, to Bhakti Shastri course.
Where we are now discussing "Nectar of Devotion". So, you know, you know, in the
"Nectar of Devotion", there are, you know, just like an ocean has two, can have
different section. The Eastern section. Western section. Northern. Southern
section. You know. So, you know, you know, "Jīva Gosv...", "Rūpa Gosvāmī" here
envisions the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". The ocean of devotion as having
different sections. So, we discussed briefly about the Eastern section. And what
he does is, every chapter, in this ocean, or a different parts of the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" are like a waves in a section. So, let us look
backwards to have an overview of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, we are now
continuing with the introduction today. You know. You know. So, we discussed the
Eastern side of the ocean. The varieties of bhakti. Prabhupada translates it as
it has overview of devotion. Devotional service in practice. And ecstasy. And
love of God. Then, Southern side has these, you know, different emotions.
Vibhava. Anubhava. Sattvika-bhava. Vyabhicarebhava. And Sthayebhava. We will not
go into the detailed discussion of these. But we will discuss them at
appropriate time briefly. Then, there is, you know, the five rasas. So, in the
Western side, the five rasas are Shanta. Dasya. Shakya. Vatsali. And Madhurya. So,
you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives examples of these "rasa"s. You know. And he
explains those rasas systematically. And in the Northern side, he, you know, you
know, talks about the, you know, secondary "rasa"s. So, you know, there are
twelve mellows. So, twel..., out of the twelve "rasa"s, there are, five are
primary. And the secondary are Hasya. Asharya. Virya. You know. You know. You
know. Krodha. Bayanaka. Baya. And Karunya. So, Karunya is fourth here. And then,
then he talks about rasa basa and vikara of "rasa"s. Incompatible. Incompatible
and distorted mellows. So, this is an overview of the, you know, structure of
the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Now, let us understand the concept of "rasa" a
little bit more. You know. There is, you know, the, there are two approaches to
understanding the Absolute Truth. One is the analytical. And the other is the
aesthetic. So, in the ana..., so, to understand it simply, one can look at a
flower. You know. Now, if we look at a flower, if I analyse a flower as a
botanist, then I will see, ok, a flower has a stamen. It has a carpel. It has
gynoecium. It has gynoecium. So, I can go into a bonatic, bot..., botanical
analysis of the various parts of a flower. Now, this analysis is valid in its
own way. But it will not lead me to appreciate the beauty of the flower. When an
artist sees a flower, the artist does not see the gynoecium. The gynoecium. What
the artist sees is, oh, how beautiful is the flower. Sees the shape. The
texture. The fragrance. The alignment of all, the petals. And the arrangement of
the whirl. So, the aesthetic vision is more suited for appreciation of beauty.
You know. Similarly, the Absolute Truth can be seen as an analytical object. And
when it is seen as analytical object, there there is "dhīmahi". Meditate.
Meditate. Meditate. So, this often leads to an impersonal sort of conception.
Where one does not relish the Absolute Truth. So, the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" starts
with this conception. And it talks about it. The first verse, "janmādy asya
yato". It ends with "dhīmahi". Meditate. You know. You know. But then, the next
verse goes on. Then, towards, its later, it describes:

        pibata bhāgavataṁ rasam ālayam

So:

        muhur aho rasikā bhuvi bhāvukāḥ

"rasikā". So, be, become "rasikā"s. "rasikā"s means those who relish mellows.
So, become "rasikā"s. And relish the mellow of devotion. And in this way, you
know, you know, the, this is talking about moving from an analytical to an
aesthetic appreciation. So, "dhīmahi" is more of meditation in, you know, in, in
an analytical mode. How vast is the Absolute Truth. And "rasikā" in a, in a, in
a deep, in an aesthetic mode. So, "rasa" is possible not in analysis. "rasa" is
possible, the "rasikā", there is, the "Bhāgavatam" says, become a "rasikā". You
know. "rasam ālayam". So, "bhāgavataṁ" is a "rasam ālayam". It is a reservoir of
"rasa". So, "Śrīmad", in one sense, "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" is an elaboration
on the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". But, you know, you know, it is a significant book
because there is, there is this, the, there is philosophical books. And there
are "rasikā" books. Now, we use the word "rasikā" books generally to talk about
pastimes of Krishna. Those  past, you know, those which talk about pastimes of
Krishna. Which make us laugh. Which make us, which move us with emotions, we
call them as "rasikā". That is fine. But the word "rasikā" in the Indian
tradition has a different meaning. So, you know, there is a book called "Nāṭya
Śāstra". Written by "Bharata Muni". And in that, he introduces the concept of
"rasa". So, there, he describes, you know, that in theater. That means in drama.
You know. There are certain things. Which evoke a specific emotions in the
audience. So, you know, so, for example, you know, when a char..., when a
person, character laughs. Or does certain actions. Then, say, "Hasya Rasa".
Laughter will be in invoked in the audience. Or, suppose, there is fighting. And
there is beating up. Then, maybe fear will be invoked. So, like that, you know,
now, this is a very simple analysis. But, you know, you know, in the, in the
"Nāṭya Śāstra", "Nāṭya Śāstra" has also been commented by various people later.
So, there, what is described is, what are the various factors. There is, what,
what is discussed in second part of the, of "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Anubhava.
Sattvika-bhava. All those. Vyabhicarebhava. All those are said to be factors
that contribute to the experience of "rasa". You know. So, "Nāṭ...", in the
"Nāṭya Śāstra", the idea is that the drama should be performed in such a way, on
the theater of that, you know, that specific "rasa" is invoked in the audience.
And what are, are the things need to be done to invoke that "rasa". That is what
is discussed in the "Nāṭya Śāstra". So, now, for the, before "Rūpa Gosvāmī",
ra..., you know, at least, in the "Nāṭya", in a, in the "rasa" tradition, "rasa"
was considered to be just an emotion that is experienced in the theater. In the
theater. That means when one sees a particular drama, one experiences emotion.
But, you know, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" took the concept from, of "rasa" from
the rasa shastra. And then, he conc..., took the, you know, philosophy from the
"Bhāgavatam". The bhakti from the "Bhāgavatam". And he brought bhakti and rasa
together. So, bhakti-rasa. And for "Rūp...", when "Rūpa Gosvāmī" explains
bhakti-rasa, he explains it in such a way that, actually, this is not something
which is experienced occasionally in a theater on a particular performance. No,
it is constantly experienced throughout life. Throughout life. Whenever a person
is practicing, you know, you know, whenever a person is serving Krishna, the
soul in the, pure, pure devotee in the spiritual world is serving Krishna, a
pure devotee experiences emotions.

So, rasa is not just a, you know, s..., you know, reduc..., re..., you know, is
not just, you know, limited to a particular, say, a drama in s..., you know,
in, you know, in a theater. But it is, pervades all actions of life. Now, with
respect to these 12 rasas, which we just now saw. There are five which are
primary. And there are, seven are, and the remaining are secondary. What does it
mean primary? And secondary? Actually, the five primary "rasa"s are also, you
know, the five primary modes of relationship with Krishna. In the spiritual
world. So, you know, there is no devotee directly in the, you know, "Bayanaka"
rasa. Or in the "Baya" rasa. You know. In the, that means, there is a devotee in
"Dasya" ra..., there are devotees "Shak...", "Dasya". "Vatsali". "Madhurya". And
the, all the devotees who are there, they fall in these five "rasa"s. And while
falling in these five "rasa"s, the, you know, seven, se..., next seven "rasa"s,
they add flavor to the relationships. So, for example, the vrajavasis, say, the
sakhas, you know, their normal relationship with Krishna will be, you know, you
know, Shakya rasa. But now, when they see Krishna, caught in the coils of
Kol..., Kaliya, at that time, they may experience an additional "Bayanaka".
Ghastliness. You know. What is going to happen now? Is Krishna going to die?
Similarly, the normal rasa of Yashoda Mayi will be, you know, to say, you know,
is, is "Vātsalya". But when she sees that Krishna is, you know, you know, is
stealing butter. Then, within that "Vātsalya", the addition rasa may be anger.
Krodha. So, the seven secondary rasas, they do not form a, you know, you know,
they do not form a, you know, you know, they do not form the basis for eternal
relationships with devotees. That, there is no, there is no devotee who is
primar..., who is permanently, eternally in Baya, in a, in Baya rasa. Or Hasya
rasa. You know. For example, you know, "Madhumangal". You know. He is a, he
makes a lot of jokes. And he, he laughs. He causes others to laugh, also. So, in
him, Hasya rasa is a little bit more. But his primary rasa of relationship is
not Hasya. His primary rasa is Sakhya. So, he is in Sakhya rasa. And Hasya is an
embellishment. So, like that. So, it, in, in, in our "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu"
study in the Bhakti Shastri course, we will be focusing on the first nineteen
chapters. So, this is an overview of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Now, let us
move forward. Yesterday, we have started discussing the definition of, you know,
you know, pure devotion as given in "Bhakti-rasāmṛta...", in
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, you know, let us look at this definition.

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

So, for some cases, situations, I am using Dhanurdhara Marahaja's book, "Waves
of Devotion". You know. You know. You know. You know. To display sanskrit. Or to
show some diagrams. And things like that. So, "anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ". You know.
We discussed all this once. But now, if we will look focus primarily on
understanding "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa" and "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So, "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa",
you know, "svarūpa" means primary characteristic. And "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa" is
secondary characteristic. So, you know, you know, "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". And
"taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So, for example, you know, water is liquid. You know. So,
liquidity is one characteristic. Then, we could say pure water. Impure water.
So, water has some defining characteristics. And one of its defining
characteristic is liquidity. But within that, there can be pure and impure. So,
like that, you know, you know, the characteristic, the primary "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"
is that bhakti is:

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

It, you know, is, "śīlanaṁ". And then:

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

So, "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" makes the bhakti, you know, makes the bhakti,
"anyā...", "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" makes the bhakti pure. So, let us understand
this once again. You know. You know. Yeah. Shown, is, so, let us come back to
this verse. We will see it here. You know. So, you know, you know, you know, so,
now, the primary characteristic is focused on this. It is "śīlanaṁ". "śīlanaṁ"
is, it is action. "ānukūlyena". It is favorable. You know. Or rather, it is
"ānu". You could put it "ānu-śīlanaṁ" as together. Kri..., and then "kṛṣṇā". So,
let us look at these three points. These are all, these three comprise the
primary characteristics. "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". So, what is "svarūpa", you know,
"svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"? That is, it is for Krishna. So, devotion is for Krishna. Pure
devotion. You know. So, in that, now, we may say that the, oh, can I not have
devotion for my nation? Can I not have devotion for my family? For my parents?
Yes, we can. In a general sense, use the word for those things. But in a
technical sense, in a technical sense, the way "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is defining it
over here, devotion is for Krishna. Now, is it exclusivist or limiting? Oh,
should love Krishna, only? Can I not love anyone else? Normally, if we love one,
like we discussed earlier, if I love my country, then I am not loving other
countries. But because Krishna is the root of all existence, when I love
Krishna, I love everyone. So, because Krishna is connected with everyone. So,
the limit, love for Krishna does not limit, you know, us becau..., it actually
pervades everything. We love Krishna. And through Krishna, we love everyone. So,
one of its "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa" is that, it is for Kri..., it is for Krishna, only.
And then, it is "ānu", you know, it is actually, you know, "śīlanaṁ".
"ānu-śīlanaṁ" means, actually, it is act..., activity. It is not some, just
sentiment. It is not just some conception. So, you know, you know, "Jīva
Gosvāmī", in his commentary, explains that, actually, bhakti is, you know, a
result, bhakti is a result, is expression of the "Hladini Shakti" of Krishna.
"Hladini Shakti" is Srimati Radharani. And when that "Hladini Shakti" is
bestowed on a devotee, on a sadh..., on a seeker, then that seeker blossoms
into a proper devotee. Before that, also, there is some devotion. But it is
small level of devotion. So, "ānu-śīlanaṁ" means that it is not just a
conception. It is actions that are them. And Prabhupada explains that the
actions can be of two types. There can be pravritti. And there is nivritti. That
mean, there are certain actions which should be done. Because they help in the
con..., you know, grou..., cultivation of devotion. And there are certain
actions which should be given up. Because those actions will impede the growth
of devotion. The development of devotion. And then, third characteristic of
"svarūpa-lakṣaṇa" is "ānukūlyena". You know. So, that means, bhakti should be
performed with the intention of pleasing Krishna. There is a difference between
pleasing Krishna and the intention of pleasing Krishna. Even when the demons
fight with Krishna, when they give a good fight, Krishna feels pleased. Yeah. We
had a good fight. But their intention was not to please Krishna. So,
Hiranyakashipu, Kamsa, whenever Krishna fights with them, these kind of demons,
at that time, time, it is not that they, those demons intend to please Krishna.
And therefore, that is not considered bhakti. "ānukūlyena". You know.

So, "Jīva Gosvāmī" gives an interesting example here. He says that when it is
already mentioned, it is for, bhakti is for Krishna, then it is meant for
Krishna. Then, again, why is it meant? Why is it need to separately maintain,
men..., mentioned? "ānukūlyena". You know. So, he gives the examp..., Prabhupada
makes a general statement. He says, Krishna includes His paraphernalia. So,
Krishna is not just Krishna alone. Krishna means, He includes, the, is the
complete Absolute Truth. So, everything comes from Him. And in one sense,
Krishna includes everything. At the same time, Krishna is different from
everything. "na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni". "mat". Krishna says "mat-sthāni
sarva-bhūtāni" in 9.4. And then, 9.5, in the Bhagavad Gita, He says "na ca
mat-sthāni bhūtāni". He says, I am situa..., everything is situated in Me. And
then, He says, I am not situated in everyhing. So, there is an inconceivable
relationship. So, that has to be understood. So, He gives the example, you know,
when a king says, let the soldier go to the battlefield. When the soldier has to
go to battlefield. And he is going for war. That means, it is in, understood,
then the soldier will go with the weapons. Soldier will not go to the
battlefield without any weapons. Because it is understood that battlefield
means, there is likely to be a, of a war. And one has to be prepared for that.
So, one would say that, many, it is said, bhakti is for Krishna. Then, there is
no need for any separate statement. You know. You know. That, you know, it has
to be favorable to Krishna. Isn't it implied? So, soldier means, the weapons are
implied with the soldier. So, similarly, with Krishna, isn't it that the
pleasing Krishna is implied? You know. Here, so, you know, Jīva Gosvāmī says,
nor..., normally, it would be implied. But in special cases, if that, the king
gives, gives a command, you know, you know, you know, feed the soldier. You
know. So, when the soldier has to be fed, you know, that means, it is the
sold..., it is not the soldier's weapons have to be fed. It is the soldier who,
who has to be fed. So, in some cases, there may have to be differentiation
between soldier and the weapons. So, like that, in some cases, there has to be
differentiation between just, you know, the activity that pleases Krishna. And
the activity that is done with the intention of pleasing Krishna. So, you know,
may, even the demon's activities may please Krishna. But the demons are not
considered devotees. Because they do not do the activities with the intention of
pleasing Krishna. So, bhakti is that which is, you know, in, done with the
intention of pleasing Krishna. So, those three "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"s are, that
it is, "ānu", so that they are actually in the C and D lines. "ānukūlyena kṛṣṇā"

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

So, it is "kṛṣṇā". It is for Krishna. "ānu-śīlanaṁ". It involves activity. It is
not just Absol..., it is not just an emotion in the heart. It is a cultivation.
It is activity. And then, it is "ānukūlyena". It is done with the intention of
pleasing Krishna. And then, the "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So, this is what
characterises bhakti. So, as, as we would say, what characterises water is
liquidity. But then, we would say, pure, if pure water means, there is, the
other things are not present in the water. So, like that, the secondary
characteristic, you know, "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa"s are the "taṭ...", the "svarūpa",
primary characteristic is "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". Secondary characteristic is called
as "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa" is that, you know, the bhakti should
be pure. Pure. How does the, so, that means, you know:

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

This is what defines bhakti. And what makes the bhakti "uttamā"? It makes it
pure is:

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

So, "anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ". That means no other desire. So, yesterday, we
discussed abut this. "ābhilāṣa" is desire. "ābhilāṣa". "ābhilāṣitā" is
intention. Or motive. So, a devotee does not have any motive other than to serve
Krishna. Or, or to please Krishna. Although, occasionally, in emergency, some
other desires may come up. And "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" means, you know, that a
devotee does not let, you know, one's devotion get dominated by
"jñāna". Or "karmā". "jñāna" and "karmā" are both useful. And they are both
used. In bhakti. So, there can be bhakti pratikula "jñāna". And there is, can be
bhakti anikula "jñāna". Similarly, there can be bhakti anikula "karmā". Bhakti
pratikula "karmā". So, the "jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam" means that, you know, you
know, "jñāna" and "karmā" which do not cover bhakti. So, the uncovered "jñāna".
And "karmā". You know. You know. So, for example, a devotee may do certain, a
devotee can also do philosophical speculation. You know. When, we, scriptures
tell us certain statements, we can contemplate, connect with other scriptural
statements. Connect with what we have heard from different sources. And try to
understand what the scripture is saying. So, that is 20:07
