Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j7YHmlDMcHU
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_153_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_02_%26_03_-_Sadhana_Bhakti_%26_Adhikara_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&redir_token=hA85srOupLafRXk331ku0nwcFlx8MTU0ODQ5MDQzMEAxNTQ4NDA0MDMw&v=j7YHmlDMcHU

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhakti Shastri, "Nectar of Devotion" course.
We are now going to start with the, you know, Second Chapter. Which is entitled
"The First Stages of Devotion". So, Srila Prabhupada starts this by describing
that, you know, you know, there are three stages. This is "devotional service in
practice". This is sadhana bhakti. Then, "devotional service in ecstasy". That
is bhava bhakti. And "devotional service in pure love of Godhead". That is prema
bhakti. And Prabhupada says that when:

"devotional service in practice there are two different qualities, devotional
service in ecstasy has four qualities, and devotional service in pure love of
Godhead has six qualities."

What does this mean? Refer to? This refers to, as we can see over here, in this
figure. You know. In sadhana bhakti, we have the first circle. That is, in
sadhana bhakti, the qualities are "Subhada". And "Klesaghni". In bhava bhakti,
the characteristics are "Sudurlabha". And "Moksha-laghutakrt". And in prema
bhakti, the characteristics are "Sri krisnakarsini" and "Sandrananda-visesatma".
So, now, Srila Prabhupada is going to start, start with the "devotional service
in practice". And then, that, he talks about the first stages of devotion. So,
he begins by saying:

"that the person eligible for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or devotional service, can be
classified by his particular taste."

So, the, now, what does taste refer to over here? Basically, you know, you know,
taste refers to the attraction to Krishna. So, the greater the attraction to
Krishna, the more advanced the devotee is. In fact, the Bhagavatam also says
that, whatever activities we do:

        dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ
        viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ
        notpādayed yadi ratiṁ
        śrama eva hi kevalam

That "dharm...", that whatever we, our prescribed duties. "dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ
puṁsāṁ". If by that, you know, performance of dharma, "viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ",
the katha of "viṣvaksena", of the Supreme Lord, "notpādayed yadi ratiṁ". If our
attraction to that "katha" does not develop, increase, then "śrama eva hi
kevalam". Then, what we are doing is actually a waste of time. "śrama eva hi".
So, you know, the purpose and perfection of everything that we do in our
spiritual life, you know, in fact, all our prescri..., all our dharmic
activities, even the material dharmic activities which are there, they are all
meant to ultimately increase our attraction to Krishna. Now, how does this
attraction to Krishna begin? You know. Even the first stage, "ādau śraddhā",
with which bhakti begins. That is also a kind of attraction. Prabhupada
translates "śraddhā" as faith. And then, other previous also translates as
favorable curiosity. That one is curious. Ok, what is this? What is this stuff?
I want to know about it. So, that is how a person begins. You know. So, now, you
know, bhakti is not produced by anything material. Bhakti is completely
independent. In fact, this subject is analysed by "Visvanatha Chakravarti
Thakura" in his book, called "Madhurya Kadambini". You know. "Madhurya
Kadambini" is in one sense, an analysis, a further analysis of the, you know,
themes exploring "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". It is not a commentary directly on
the book. But it is a further analysis, the same subject. So, you know, therein,
he describe..., he analysis, how does bhakti begin? Srila Prabhupada writes over
here that, you know:

"No one can take to devotional service unless he has had some previous
connection with it."

Now, this raises, this leads to a question, if we cannot have, if we cannot have
a subject wherein we focus primarily on devotion, then the problem with that
devotion is that, how does the devotion begin? If we focus on the, right now, we
are discussing the subject of devotion, so, devotion has to begin from previous
devotion. But then that, it leads to sort of infinite regress. When does
devotion originally begin? So, actually, that devotion originally begins, you
know, by not any past activity. So, it begins by the mercy of the devotees. Let
us try to understand this. You know. So, one has to have some attraction for
devotional service. And then, there will be execution of devotional service. So,
when we have attraction, then we will execute devotional service. And when we
execute devotional service, our attraction will grow. So, now, where does it
begin? If I do not have any attraction, I will not do any devotional service.
And if I do not do any devotional service, then I will not become attracted to
Krishna. Actually, this circle, which one started, is self-sustaining. But how
does it become started? It starts with the mercy of a pure devotee. It starts
with the mercy of the devotees. The devotees intervene in our life. And give us
the opportunity. The impetus. The inspiration to practice devotional service.
And that is how mercy, that is how our bhakti begins. So, whether it is in this
life. Or in a previous life. Bhakti begins through the, you know, intervention
of a pure devotee. Or a pure devotee's representative in a conditioned soul's
life. So, this is a great fortune. As Srila Prabhupada has quoted in previous
chapter. And as he would often quote in his writings. And his talks.

        brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva
        guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

So, "guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya". "guru". And "kṛṣṇa". Both "prasāde", Both
"prasāde" is required. The mercy of spiritual master. And the mercy of Krishna.
So, mercy of spiritual master that he comes and sends His representative. Mercy
of Krishna is, you know, that, of course, he sends the spirtiual master. That
are also mercy of Krishna is internal. He prompts the devotee. Go here. Listen.
Understand. Comprehend. So, both ways:

        yo ’ntar bahis tanu-bhṛtām aśubhaṁ vidhunvann
        ācārya-caittya-vapuṣā sva-gatiṁ vyanakti

In the Eleventh Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam, he says, internally, externally, the
Supreme Lord is working for the welfare of the living being. So, "’nt...",
"’ntar bahis tanu-bhṛtām aśubhaṁ vidhunvann". Trying to remove aus..., remove
inauspiciousness. Why? How? "ācārya-caittya-vapuṣā". Internally as the,
externally as the "ācārya". Internally, as the "caittya guru". As the Paramatma.
You know. "sva-gatiṁ vyanakti". That, you know, the "sva-gatiṁ". The real
self-interest is delineated by the Supreme Lord. So, the Supreme Lord is
ultimately the bestower of mercy. But, you know, "Visvanatha Chakravarti
Thakura" analysis this. And he says, on what basis the Supreme Lord bestow His
mercy? Is it on the basis of punya? That this person is punyavan. This person is
less punyavan. And therefore, I will give this person mercy. You know. He says
no. That is not possible. Because that, if that were so, then punya would become
the cause of bhakti. Because the Lord is bestowing bhakti. Because this person
has punya. So, punya would become the cause of bhakti. And punya is not the
cause of bhakti. Punya is material. Punya is not spiritual. Punya and papa. They
are like two sides of the same coin. And one is pos..., materially positive. The
other is pot..., materially negative. But both are material. And nothing
material can lead to spiritual devotion. You know. So, then, you know, now,
Krishna does say that when the material sins are removed, then one becomes
steady in devotion.

        yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ
        janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām
        te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā
        bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

So, in 7.28, He says that, when the sinful reac..., sinful acts, sins ended by
many life, our many lifetimes. "yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ". The "pāpaṁ" become
ended. "janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām". And one does "puṇya". You know. You know. "te
dvandva-moha-nirmuktā". At that time, one becomes free from the illusion of
duality. And "bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ". One becomes fixed in devotion.
Worships Krishna with fixed devotion. So, here, Krishna is not talking about the
beginning of bhakti. Krishna is talking about the determined practice of bhakti.
So, you know, you know, when we have become free from sins, when we become
situated in goodness, which is, which correlates with doing punya, then our
bhakti becomes steady. Because as long as we have sinful desires, then the
sinful desires keep dragging away, us away from the path of bhakti. But this
verse is not telling that one has to become free from sinful reactions to start
the bhakti. Yes, to become steady in bhakti, one does need to be free from
sinful reaction. "bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ". You know. Krishna says, earlier
that, in seven point, this is in, in the same Seventh Chapter, He says 7.16 that
there are four kinds of people who surrender to Me. And then, He does not
mention, mention any specific qualification for them. Just that they are
"su-kṛtinaḥ".

        catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ
        janāḥ su-kṛtino ’rjuna
        ārto jijñāsur arthārthī
        jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

So, He says "ārto". Distressed. We will discuss about these four categories a
little later. "ārto". "jijñāsur". "arthārthī". "jñānī". The distressed. The
seeker of money. The inquisitive. And the, you know, and the seeker of
knowledge. So, all these surrender to Krishna. Or are, the, they begin
worshipping Krishna. Sorry. They do not surrender to Krishna. Surrender comes
much later when they become "jñānavān". That is mentioned in 7.19. So, here,
they begin surrender to Krishna. Or begin, you know, worship of Krishna. Begin
devotional service to Krishna. So, here, saying these are the impetuses which,
because of which, is serving, may start serving Krishna. But we will see later
on tht, actually, these are below the categories which "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is talking
about. "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is talking about pure devotional service and the means to
approach pure devotional service. You know. You know. So, here, how does one
begin devotional service? So, He is saying that, it is by the mercy of a devotee
It is not by "puṇya". Now, the, that is the first factor. Is it by, is that the
mercy of the Lord come independently of any other factors? You know. The Lord
decides, ok, I will give mercy to this person. I will not give mercy to this
person. That would make the Lord arbitrary. That would make the Lord partial.
That is favoring this person. That is not favoring that person. So, then, the
Lord is not partial. The Lord is impartial. The Lord is supremely fair. They
know on what basis does the Lord give mercy. So, "Visvanatha Chakravarti
Thakura", after elaborate analysis, concludes that it is by the mercy, the
Lord's mercy follows the mercy of His devotees. That means that whoever the
devotees decide to give mercy, the Lord gives mercy to them. And in this way,
the Lord, you know, is "Bhaktya sanjayate bhakti". As the "Bhāgavatam" says, by
bhakti, bhakti is born. Bhakti cannot, or emerge automatically by itself. So,
from exact.., from some other bhakta, in whose heart, bhakti is there. By
contact with that bhakta, the bhakti within our heart will emerge. So, "Bhaktya
sanjayate bhakti". Now, you know, when a devotee intervenes in a, in a, you
know, when, in a conditioned soul's life. Now, often, it is the attraction to
the devotee that leads to attraction to Krishna. Most of Srila Prabhupada's
disciples, they were attracted to Srila Prabhupada. He was a fascinating person
for them. And Prabhupada was serving Krishna. They also started serving Krishna
by that. Prabhupada told them to serve Krishna. They also started serving
Krishna. So, in India, we see that many people know Krishna as a cultural or
even a religious figure. Even they may consider Him to be God. But they are not
really very serious sadhakas. They may have some Kri..., sentiment of, you know,
a devotion. But they are not serious spiritual seekers. That is spirit, serious
spiritual seekers, you know, requires association with one who is a seer. Or at
least one who is a serious seeker. That means one who is a devotee. Without
association with devotees, one cannot become very advanced in spiritual life.
When we see, one cannot start practicing serious spiritual life. Leave alone
become very advanced in spiritual life. So, we will discuss about this when we
come, talk about Kanistha. Madhyama. And Uttama a little later. But here, now,
so, bhakti begins by the mercy of pure devotees. That is the first point. Then,
you know, the, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" talks about what is sadhana bhakti. So, let us
look at the definition of sadhana bhakti here. You know. This is a slightly
tehnical sen..., definition.

        kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya- bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā
        nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā

So, "kṛti-sādhyā". "kṛti-sādhyā" means that which is to be executed with the
senses. "bhavet sādhya". So, you know, you know, "bhavet" means "kṛti-sādhyā".
When things are executed by the senses. "bhavet". It happens. What happens?
"sādhya- bhāvā". That that "bhāvā". Emotion towards Krishna is the "sādhya".
That is our goal. "sā sādhanābhidhā". So, that is called as "ābhidhā sādhanā".
"ābhidhā sādhanā" is "sādhanā" in devotional service. And by this, what happens?
"nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya". "nitya-siddhasya". "nitya-siddha" means that which
is eternally present. "bhāvasya". That "bhāvā" which is eternally present.
"prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā". "prākaṭyaṁ". That becomes manifest. "hṛdi". In the
heart. "sādhyatā". That is its potentiality. The potentiality becomes manifest.
You know. So, essentially, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is making three different
points over here. He is talking about "nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi
sādhyatā". That, actually, "bhāvā" for Krishna is "nitya" in our heart. It is
eternal. It is present. It is in..., "sādhyatā". It is potential. So, Srila
Prabhupada says that pra..., practicing devotional service is not, you know,
acquiring something foreign to us. As Srila Prabhupada tal..., also says in his
famous, you know, talk about introducing the Hare Krishna maha mantra. He says
Krishna Consciousness is not an artificial imposition on the mind. It is the
original spiritual energy. Original natural state. The original spiritual energy
Of all of us. So, therein, he says, it is not an artificial imposition. That
means it is not something extraneous to us. It, it is not something which is
outside of us. It is inside. Which we develop. So, "nity...", "prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi
sādhyatā". You know. That that which is, potentiality is brought forward. And
Prabhupada gives the example when a child, when a, you know, small baby starts
making its first steps. It starts learning to walk. So, the mother helps the
baby in learning to walk. But the baby has the capacity to walk. You know. If it
did not have the capacity to walk, it would never be able to learn to walk. So,
in contrast, if we say that can the baby learn to fly? You know. A human baby
cannot. A bird baby can, may learn to fly. But the human baby does not have the
potentiality to fly. So, you know, that which is the, you know, that which is
not potential, cannot be made, as in physics, we say, potential to kinetic. That
which is potential gen..., not potential cannot be made kinetic. That which is
not dormant cannot be made active. So, bhakti is not something foreign to us.
It, "nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya". You know. You know. "prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā".
That, actually, it is present in the heart. Eternally. And only, there is only
certain practice by which, it is brought out. So, that is the first point he
makes. And Srila Prabhupada, you know, repeatedly emphasises this point. And
Prabhupada would often say that that is how people all over the world, you know,
are taking up devotional service. They may have not heard about Krishna for
twenty years of their lives, say. And then, maybe in six months, they hear about
the Krishna. And then, they often shave their head. Wear dhoti. Kurta. Or saari.
And start chanting 16 rounds. And following four regulative principles. How does
that happen? This is not just some external brainwashing that is done by some
group on people. You know. That sort of brainwashing cannot last for very long.
And it cannot bring about such a big transformation. And, you know, actually, it
is the, you know, Prabhupada would sometimes refer, respond to this brainwashing
argument by saying that, now, the, the, normally, the word brainwashing. It is
used to say, it is, there is, somebody is externally pushing, you know, some
dogma down a, or one person's throat. That is called brainwashing a person. But
Prabhupada would say brainwashing is, your brain is filled with dirt, we are
washing the brain. You know. Washing the dirt from the brain. You should thank
us. Not, you know, not charge us. Not send, take us to court for this. So,
actually, the, around the soul, there is a lot of dirt. And as we said, within
within one, then one is to wash away. So, what the, the process of bhakti does
is, washes away that dirt. And once the dirt is washed away, then the original,
natural attraction of the soul for Krishna is awakened. So, that is the first
point. Now, after that, the second point:

        kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya- bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

So, "kṛti-sādhyā". It is performed with the senses. "sādhanā bhakti". How is it
performed? It is with "kṛti", senses. "kṛti-sādhyā". At an advanced stage, a
devotee may just absorb oneself in remembrance of Krishna, internally. That is
good if one's get absorbed oneself in remembrance of Krishna. And that is at an
advances stage. It happens when we have natural love for Krishna. But in the
stage of "sādhanā bhakti". We "kṛti-sādhyā". That is why we do not, you know,
chant in the mind. You know. The Hare Krishna maha mantra, the primary
"sādhanā", we do not chant it in the mind. We chant it aloud. At the very least,
we do to panksa. "kṛti-sādhyā" is to be executed with the senses. And, you know,
"kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya- bhāvā". So, what is wanted by this? "bhāvā" is to be
awakened. So, that which is dormant, Prabhupada uses the word "prākaṭyaṁ". You
know. Rather, "prākaṭyaṁ" is the word used by "Rūpa Gosvāmī" over here. So,
"prākaṭyaṁ" means to appear. Appear means that which is, exists. But which comes
within our sub..., vision at a particular time. Just like the sun arises. So,
you know:

        śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

"Caitanya-caritāmṛta" says "udaya". "udaya" means to rise. So, you know, bhakti,
you know, you know, Krishna, attraction for Krishna arises. Just like the sun
arises. So, "bhāvā" arises. So, that "bhāvā" is the goal. Now, this raises a
question. That if I am acting with the senses. The senses are material. And the
actions of the senses are often mechanical. So, how can the mechanical lead to
the devotional? So, bhakti, is it produced by some mechanical repetition? So, if
I just repeat, Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Rama Hare Rama
Rama Rama Hare Hare. Is this mechanical repetition of a particular sound with my
physical or material senses going to lead to awakening of the soul? How can
mechanical practice produce, you know, "bhāvā"? So, "Bhaktivinoda Thakur"
explains that, actually, from imperfection, perfection arises. So, just like a
lotus rises from a dirt. Arises even in a dirty place. So, like that, we may be
imperfect initially. But from imperfection, perfection arises. What does he mean
by that? Actually, by the practice of bhakti, it is not just mechanical. You
know. The soul, the mind, and the body, all of them are connected together. And
the soul's consciousness is largely channelised at the phy..., mental and
physical levels right now. The soul, its original spiritual life with Krishna is
almost completely blank, now. You know. Krishna is right next to us in our
heart. But although He is right next to us, we cannot perceive His presence. Nor
can we hear His voice in most occasions. So, we are, our consciousness is not at
all at the spiritual level. So, our consciousness is mostly at the material
level, is almost entirely at the material level. And that is why our
consciousness can be spiritualised by engaging the senses with spiritual sense
objects. Spiritual sense objects means, sense objects, generally, we use it for,
say, you know, the opposite sex. Or say, delicious food. Or some things like
that. But that, that is a specific use of the word sense object. Sense objects
means those objects which are pursued by the senses. So, in one sense, even the
deity is a sense object. It is perceived by our senses. So, so, differentiate it
from what we normally call as sense objects. The deity can be called as a
spiritual sense object. So, it is something which, you know, does not direct our
consciousness towards material realm. It directs our consciousness toward the
spiritual level of reality. Towards Krishna. Of course, the deity is Krishna
Himself. But we may not be able to perceive Kri..., the non-difference between
the deity and Krishna at our stage of lev..., realisation. But at the very
least, we can perceive that, ok, the deity reminds me of Krishna. The deity
directs my consciousness towards Krishna. So, actually, when we perform "sādhanā
bhakti" with our senses. It is not just the mechanical repetition of senten...,
sense, senses that awakens "bhāvā". Rather, the mechanical eng..., the
mechanical engagement of the senses provides a pathway for the spiritual
redirection of, you know, spiritual direction, you know, redirection of our
thought. That means, you know, you know, we are, by default, at the material
level of concsiousness. And how can we suddenly rise to the spiritual level of
consciousness? We cannot. It, it is diff..., very difficult. But if we have some
sense objects. Something which we, say, you know, the holy name which we utter
physic..., utter wordl..., utter loudly. The deities which we see. The
scriptures which we read. The holy places that we travel. And visit. Then, what,
the, by this, our consciousness gets a spiritual direction. And when our
consciousness gets a spiritual direction, then gradually, that contact of our
consciousness with spiritual reality, you know, removes the coverings on our
consciousness.

So, here, there is a soul. The soul is covered, you know, say, you know, say, if
this is the soul. The soul is covered by material contaminations. And if the
soul keeps perceiving material reality, those material contaminations keep
increasing. More and more layers of, you know, material conditions keep coming.
But if the soul is exposed to spiritual reality. If I go in front of the
deities, if I chant the holy names, then the soul is spiritual. In-between,
there is material covering. But there is a spiritual phenomena. Or spiritual
object. Spiritual contact. So, when there is a contact of this, gradually, so,
the soul is spiritual. The object with which the soul is engaging through the
senses are spiritual. And this contact gradually starts removing the material
layer. And once the material layer is removed, then the soul has a natural
attraction to Krishna. That natural attraction awakens. So, in that sense, you
know, bhakti is not a development. But a revival. It, it is, it is not something
which we develop as something which we do not have. It is something which we
have. But it was, it was dormant. Now, it is simply revived. It is a revival.
Although, sometimes, we may use the word development. But in a, it is a
non-technical sense. In a technical sense, more precise sense, it is a revival.
So, when we revive our bhakti, you know, our devotional attraction towards
Krishna, the sensory engagement provides us the pa..., you know, a pathway by
which that revival progresses. Now, if somebody does this sensory engagement
without the desire for that revival. Without the desire for Krishna. That means,
somebody simply utters the words mechanically. Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna. Just
mechanically. Without any longing for Krishna. Then, you know, that person's
consciousness is not going towards the spiritual direction much. In fact,
sometimes, may not go at all. You know. Some singers, some professional singers,
they may sing bhakti songs. But their interest is not devotional. It is
commercial. You know. They want to sing so that they can earn money. You know.
People can come for their performance. And clap. And pay. And they want to have
their own dvds. And sell them. And become brand names as bhakti singers. You
know. But if their goal is not devotional. If they are not interested in, you
know, becoming attracted towards Krishna, then they may sing vigorously. You
know. They may sing sweetly, also. You know. Repeatedly, also. But still, that
singing will not attract, not revive their attraction towards Krishna. Because
they are eng..., engaging their senses. But they are not longing for Krishna.
They are longing for money. They are longing for fame. As we have said, you
know, if we want fame, then we do not get "prema". You know. So, what happens
is, we have to choose. So, if somebody wants to, wants fame. And that is the
primary desire, then bhakti will awaken very, very gradually if at all. It may
take very, many, many lifetimes for bhakti to start awakening. So, it is not
mechanical. That is why when we perform "sādhanā", also, especially when we
chant our jappa. Sixteen rounds. You know. We cannot do it mecha..., we, if we
are doing it mechanically, then we will not lead, it will not lead to much
spiritul advancement. We have to chant seriously. Seriously means, not that we
have to have grave face while chanting. You know. We want gravity so that we fix
our mind on Krishna. Serious chanting does not mean, you know, just a grave
face. It means focusing our, you know, concentration on the holy name. And
developing a longing, Krishna, I have left you for so long. I want to return to
You. You are my Lord. You are my master. I want to come to You. Please help me
to return to You. So, please accept my chanting as an offering to You for Your
pleasure. As an expression of my heart's longing for You. So, when we chant with
this aspiration, then that chanting will rapidly awaken our love for Krishna.

So, bhakti, "sādhanā bhakti", or, and at the stage of "sādhanā bhakti", we may
not have attraction towards Krishna. But still, we should try to have at least
some feelings. Some longing. Krishna, I want to return to You. And with that, we
try to perform bhakti. And especially, when we associate with senior devotees,
or sometimes, in the association of senior devotee, senior devotees, we see how
eager they are for Krishna. And their eagerness for Krishna can rub of on us.
And that will bring about a spark of eagerness within us. And that is how we
will be able to move forward. In our spiritual life. So, you know, Srila
Prabhupada explains that:

"There are certain prescribed methods for employing our senses and mind in such
a way that our dormant consciousness for loving Kṛṣṇa will be invoked, as much
as the child, with a little practice, can begin to walk."

So, our prescribed method is "śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ". They are like the practice
that a child does. So that the child will learn to walk. And then, Prabhupada
explains that:

"As a man’s mental disease is cured by the directions of a psychiatrist, so this
sādhana-bhakti cures the conditioned soul of his madness under the spell of
māyā,"

You know. You know. So, we are all sick. So, we are all sick. You know. We, we
can say that we are all mad. The madness is that "nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute
vikarma". In "Ṛṣabhadeva"'s teachings, Swami Prabhupada's favorite quotes.
"pramattaḥ". The soul is intoxicated. Maddened. "kurute vikarma". Engages in all
kinds of sinful activities. For what? "yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti". "āpṛṇoti".
For "indriya-prītaye". For sense gratification. You know. Now, what is the cause
of our madness? Actually, at one level, we can say it is amnesia. Many of you
may have seen in movies that sometimes, a person has an accident. And then,
falls. And then, ha..., has a bang on the head. And loses memory. And then, say,
people who rescue that person from that pave..., from, second, the accident. He
says, what is your name? My name, my name, my name, my, I cannot remember my
name. I cannot remember. You know. That person becomes agitated. So, disturbed.
It can be a horrible event. Even, will loses one's memory. But actually, even
more act, act, horrible than losing our memory is losing the memory that we have
lost our memory. That means that we do not even understand that we have
forgotten. So, what happens with maya is, there is "avaranatmika-sakti". And
there is "praksepatmika-sakti". Now, "ava...", "avaranatmika-sakti" and
"praksepatmika-sakti", if that person wants to watch a movie, then the first
thing that is done is the lights are switched off. So, what happens is, lights
are switched off. Who we are really. Who I am. Where I am. That, that perception
will, gets cut off. So, that is like the "avaranatmika-sakti". Switch off the
lights. And then, then, the another set of lights turned on. The lights on the
screen turned on. And then, the illusion starts over there. So, that is like the
"praksepatmika-sakti". Throws us into illusion. So, like that, our illusion is
twofold. We do not just have amnesia. We have not just forgotten our true
identity. But we have forgotten our forgetfulness. And we have taken on a false
identity. So, that means, we have assumed, we think, I am a male. I am a female.
I am Indian. I am American. Whatever. And because of this doubled illusion.
Double, double problem. Like a mad mo..., mad person is mad because the mad
person does not understand that I am mad. You know. That person thinks I am
normal. And people think, those who think that I am mad, they are mad. So, 30:50 
