Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkgvUSXbUY4
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_150_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Preface_and_Intro_-_Bhakti_Rasa_and_Uttama_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=nY007kOEByvngMmJIFdMgp7JpSd8MTU0ODQ5MDM1M0AxNTQ4NDAzOTUz&v=WkgvUSXbUY4&event=video_description

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome to the last book within our Bhakti Shastri course. We are
now discussing "The Nectar of Devotion". You know. You know. So, "The Nectar of
Devotion" is Srila Prabhupada's English rendition of the title of "Rūpa
Gosvāmī"'s masterpiece called as "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, "Bhakti" is
devotion. "rasā" is mellow. Or flavor. Or "rasā". You know. Or, or, actually,
there is no equivalent translation literally. "āmṛta" is nectar. So, you know,
you know, the, the, "sindhu". "sindhu" is sea. Or ocean. So, it can, if there
is, literal translation would go, it would be the nectarian ocean of the "rasā"
of "bhakti". So, that becomes a complicated translation. If we put in, you know,
the point that "rasā" cannot be exactly translated into English. So, the word
"rasā". We will discuss it, you know, later, more in detail. When we come to it.
But in general, most people, when they know Hindi. Or other vernacular
languages. The word "rasā" is generally used to refer to something like aamras.
Or ganaras. You know. The juice of mango. Or juice of sugarcane. But the way
Srila Prabhupada uses it, and the way "Rūpa Gosvāmī" uses it, and the way the
"rasā" shastras use it, is something different. It is, and it is not a taste in
the, like a, you know, the juice coming out of a particular object. Which is
called as "rasā". But it is actually, you know, a sweet emotion. It is an
emotion, basically. Not all rasas are sweet. You know. But, you know, it is an
emotion. So, we will discuss about "rasā" more in detail. So, Srila Prabhupada
translates "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" as "Nectar of Devotion". And this is a large
book. And in the Bhakti Shastri, we will not be covering the full book. We will
be focusing on the, you know, you know, first part. That is the 19 chapters. And
these 19 chapters, you know, will give us an overview of sadha..., of
vaidhi-bhakt..., of sadhana-bhakti. And then, ragha..., o..., o...,
raghanuga-bhakti. So, of, the, the, actually, will be, that there are three
prior stages to bhakti. There is devotion in practice. Which is said to be, you
know, sadhana-bhakti. And then, there is, you know, devotion in ecstasy.
Prabhupada translates, that is bha..., bhava-bhakti. And then, there is
prema-bhakti. So, we will discuss these three, you know, you know, categories of
bhakti. In the first 19 chapters. And that is what we will be primarily focusing
on. So, let us look at the preface. Now, the, generally, when books start, they
can have multiple, you know, you know, you know, introductory write-ups. So, one
word for the introductory write-up can be simply introduction. Others can be,
another can be preface. Another is foreword. Sometimes, there is prologue. So,
these are all different slight..., in slight technical terms. So, foreword is
generally written by somebody else. Apart from the author. So, the foreword is
generally written by a person who is more likely to be familiar to the audience.
And then, they, just like when a person is giving a class, at that time, you
know, some speak, some person, some other person comes and introduces the
speaker to the audience. So, generally, the introducer is familiar to the
audience. And then, the introducer acts as a bridge between the speaker and the
audience. At least, a starting of, while introducing. So, foreword is like that.
Foreword is written by somebody else. Apart from the speaker. You know. You
know. Apart from the author of the book.

So, when Srila Prabhupada first published the, his Bha..., Bhagavad Gita as it
is, it was p..., it was, he did not publish it. He was, ISKCON was too new at
that time to have its own press. So, Macmillan published it. So, at that time,
there was, you know, foreword written by Allen Ginsberg. You know. You know.
Just like in Krsna Book, we have a foreword written by George Harrison. So, of
course, Srila Prabhupada later on felt that, due, because Allen Ginsberg was a
hippie leader. And he, you know, he was quite a controversial person. Who, you
know, would advo..., who would advocate taking of drugs for spiritual
realisation. Prabhupada eventually, you know, when BBT, when ISKCON Press, that later
on began, BBT published the, you know, Bhagavad Gita as it is, they decided to
remove that foreword. But Prabhupada kept George Harrison's foreword in Krsna
Book. And so, George Harrison was a phenomenally famous person. During his
times, at least. And he acted as a bridge between, you know, you know, the,
Sri..., Srila Prabhupada and his Krsna Book. And the audience. So, that is with
re..., foreword. So, Nect..., "Nectar of Devotion" does not have a foreword. So,
there is a preface. There is an introduction. And, as I said, the, some,
generally, prologue, if it is there, it is generally for novels. So, it
describes one brief scene from a novel. You know. Something which is
captivating. Or something which, you know, creates the setting. But, of which,
the later action unfolds. From where, the later action unfolds. So, that is, you
know, you know, the prologue. So, here, we do not have a prologue. We have
preface. And phrase..., introduction. So, generally, these are, you know, phrase
did, in different ways. So, Srila Prabhupada, in the preface of the Bhagavad
Gita, he basically talks about how he wrote the Bhagavad Gita. And he talks
a, more about his connection with the book. And he talks about how, you know,
you know, he, you know, how he came to write the book. And how it is going to be
important for the Krishna Consciousness movement. And then, Prabhupada, in the
introduction of the Bhagavad Gita, focuses on the book. And he talks about the
five subjects taught in the Bhagavad Gita, "jīva", "īśvara", "kāla", "karma",
"prakṛti". And he explains those five subjects in his introduction. So, here, in
contrast, Srila Prabhupada con..., he uses the preface for, to give what he
wants to give. You know. That means that in the preface, he introduces Rūpa
Gosvāmī to the audience. He introduces, you know, you know, the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" briefly. And then, he also talks about the concept of
"bhakti-rasā". So, it, the book is about "Bhakti-rasāmṛta", is
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, "bhakti-rasā", he introduces in the preface. And
then, in the introduction, largely, Srila Prabhupada focuses on the, you know,
introduction of the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" itself. And then, he takes some of
the verses. He takes the invocation verse. And other verses. And he elaborates
on those verses. So, he also talk..., you know, talks about the definition of
pure devotional verse. Which "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has talked about. So, the way
prefa..., Prabhupada uses preface and introduction in, you know,
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" is different from the way he uses it in, you know, you
know, Krsna Book. But essentially, we will focus on what Srila Prabhupada is
giving in his preface and introduction. Now, Srila Prabhupada called "Nectar of
Devotion" as a summary study. Summary study means that it is, you know, you
know, as Prabhu..., Srila Prabhupada is giving us an explanation in English
language. Of the, you know, intricate concepts that "Rūpa Gosvāmī" brings to
bear in his "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu".

So, Srila Prabhupada has, wrote two books as summary studies. One was the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". Or, which we can, which he renderred as "The Nectar of
Devotion". And the second was "Krsna Book". Which he renderred as the, you know,
so, which, the Tenth Canto of "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam", which he renderred as the
Krsna Book. So, Satsvarupa Maharaja writes in his, you know, you know, you know,
one of his books appreciating Srila Prabhupada. You know. Prabhupada was asked,
what exactly does a summary study mean? So, Prabhupada, in a lighter way, and
said, summary study means I do what I want. So, what does it mean I do what I
want? It is not necessarily what Srila, what, you know, actually, Srila
Prabhupada was, you know, you know, basically pointing out that he does not
stick to any, you know, scholastic conventions. But he, basically, takes the
book. And presents it in a way, you know, that is relevant to the audience. So,
in Krsna Book, Srila Prabhupada does not necessarily, you know, stick to the
literal flow of the pastime. Although, he gives the pastime. But Srila
Prabhupada buffers the pastime with, you know, adequate philosophical ex...,
contextualisation and explanation so that people who are unfamiliar with
Krishna, and who can easily misunderstand the pastimes of Krishna, get a proper
understanding. That is what Srila Prabhupada does through his Krsna Book. Now,
similarly, "Nectar of Devotion", when Srila Prabhupada as a, Prabhupada says, I
do what I want, that basically means that he, you know, does not follow the, you
know, you know, stu..., the, the systematic scholarly format which he uses in
his "Bhagavad-gītā", "Bhāgavatam", "CC". There, what does Srila Prabhupada do?
He tran..., gives the sanskrit verse. Of course, that is the way the book is
published. But sanskrit verse. Then, the Roman transliteration. And the word to
word translation. Then, the sentence translation. And then, the purport. So,
when this is done, it i..., it i..., it i..., it actually requires a huge amount
of effort. You know. The way, Srila Prabhupada wrote his books, it is
remarkable. Because actually, he was travelling so much. And while traveling so
much, if one has to write, you know, if we look at the tradi..., you know, the
traditionally, when the scholars would have to write, they would just stay at
one place. There, they would have their libraries. And they would side. And
research their libraries. And write their books. So, Srila Prabhupada was
constantly traveling. He had some books with him. He had for, you know, the, you
know, the commentaries of the previous acharyas. You know. And then, he would
use those, but still, Sri..., there were a number of verses that Srila
Prabhupada quotes in his, you know, purports, is remarkable. And ma..., many of
the places, Srila Prabhupada quotes appropriate verses. Which are not
necessarily quoted there by the previous acharyas. So, that means Srila
Prabhupada is recollecting those verses from his memory. And he is, you know,
seeing the need to use those verses to explain the particular point over there.
And he is quoting them. So, Srila Prabhupada's scholarship is itself
phenomenal. In many ways. And, you know, his, of course, he is the, you know, he
is the empowered representative of Lord Krishna. And Lord Chaitanya. In this
age. And what we are discussing about here is that the way Srila Prabhupada
presented "Bhagavad-gītā", "Bhāgavatam", "CC", it is phenomenal. Because when he
is travelling so much, you know, cannot carry an exhaustive library. And of
course, we know that, he would spend time late at night, dictating the purports.
So, it is remarkable in its own, you know, right.

Now, but that kind of work requires huge amount of time. You know. And Srila
Prabhupada wrote the, you know, you know, Caitany..., wrote Krsna Book because
he felt that, you know, he, because he was, you know, quite in an advanced age.
And he was, felt that, I may not be, live long enough to actually be able to
translate the full, you know, "Bhāgavatam". And because the Tenth Canto was so
important. So, he felt that, that has, that he has to present that for the sake
of the world. And when, therefore, he presented that using the, you know, using
the, you know, summary study format. In which he gave the Krsna Book. And we
see, Srila Prabhupada's foresight. Sagacity. And wisdom in doing that. Because,
although he kept translating and commenting till the, you know, he kept
commenting until the, nearly the last breath of his life. You know. Still, he
had to depart. When he was in the Tenth Canto. So, we have, you know, the
Thirteen Chapter. And some sections of the Fourteen Chapter. You know. In the
Tenth Canto. And, you know, you know, if Srila Prabhupada had not been
farsighted enough to give us Krsna Book, then, we would not have had his, you
know, have got his, his guid..., assistance in understanding Krishna's pastimes.
In fact, his, what the spiritual master gives is not just assistance. Spiritual
master gives understanding itself. You know. That is very important. So,
similarly, "Nectar of Devotion" is quite a technical book. It is a con...,
technical book. And translating it verse by verse, by verse, is quite a
demanding task. So, that is why Srila Prabhupada focuses on giving us a summary
study. Because Srila Prabhu..., because this is one of the most important books
in the, in, you know, for the Gaudiya Vaishnavas, primarily. Why is it so
important? Because in the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, you know, there is the,
you know, special concept of, you know, madhurya rasa. Of course, madhurya rasa,
it, the concept, you know, the principle of the attract..., of the romance of
the Lord. The attraction of the Lord, between Him and His devotees, you know, is
con..., in con..., in conjugal relationship. That is there, you know, that is
there as a fact in the Vedic literature. And that is talked about by the other
Vaishnava Sampradayas, also. So, for example, there is Sri. And there is Vishnu.
And there are temples like, which have the worship of Sri. And Vishnu. In the
Sri Sampradaya, also. But the intimacy of the relationship, in the madhurya
rasa, is very special. You know. As explained in the Gaudiya Sampradaya. And in
this particular, you know, you know, you know, sweetness is explained in the
Gaudiya Sampradaya. Through the, you know, the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu",
primarily. So, if we look at these four books. "Isha Upanishad", we discussed as
a, is a broadly, a Vedic book. Then, "Bhagavad-gītā", that Vedic book means
what? It is actually accepted as an authoritative book by all people within the
Vedic circles. It is considered a, Shankaracharya talked about these
"Prasthanatrayi". And actually, the "Prasthanatrayi" concept came before him.
But he gave it great importance. "Prasthanatrayi" means if one wants to
understand Vedanta, one has to have a commentary on three books. These book,
three books are, you know, the Vedanta Sutra. The Bhagavad Gita. And the
Upanishads.

So, the Vedanta Sutra is called as "Nyaya". Bhagavad Gita is called as, you
know, sru..., you know, sru..., you know, is called, you know, is "Smriti". And
the, you know, the Upanishads are the "Śruti". So, you know, the "Isha
Upanishad", so, if we consider this to be like a, consider, four books of the,
you know, nectar, of the Bhakti Shastri to be like a pyramid. Then, the "Isha
Upanishad" is a Vedic book. Which is accepted by, you know, the, all the, by,
practically, in the Vedic c..., Vedic schools. All the schools accept this is
important book. Then, Bhagavad Gita is also like that. Although Bhagavad Gita is
focus on Krishna. And in many ways, it is a Vaishnava book. But Bhagavad Gita is
also accepted large..., by most varieties of people who are followers of the
Vedic culture. Now, "Nectar of Instruction" is a book of general instructions.
For the followers who want to prac..., cultivate bhakti. So, it is a sadhana
book. And it is, now, if we move it upward, upward, now, the special revelations
that the world has, you know, received through the Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya,
they come in the books which are given by the Gaudiya Vaishnava acharyas. So, we
are studying in our "Bhakti-rasāmṛta...", in our Bhakti Shastri course, two
books. One is bhak..., you know, "Upadesamrta". And "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu".
From "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, Srila Prabhupada, he translated and commented on the,
you know, "Nectar...", of the "Upadesamrta". Calling it as "Nectar of
Instruction". It is quite a literal translation. And, you know, he gave, in his
normal way, word to word translation, translation. And purport. So, you know,
that book gives practical ana..., practical instructions. Bhagavad, "Nectar of
Devotion" also gives instructions. When "Nectar of Devotion" goes deeper into
the speciality of, you know, of, you know, "Bhakti-rasā" as is revealed in the
Gaudiya Sampradaya. The word, you know, Gaudiya refers to many things.
Primarily, it refers to Gauda-desam. You know. You know. That Gauda-desa is the
area which Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared. You know. In the banks of the
Ganga river. So, that branch of Vaishnavism, that appeared in that area.
Actually, that is an external meaning. The, its internal meaning is "Gauda" is
related with the word "Guda". "Guda" is jaggery. So, jaggery is "Guda". You
know. So, actually, jaggery grows in various parts of the, you know, various
parts of the world. But actually, the jaggery that grows in Bengal, especially
sweet. It is almost like chocolate. So, Vaishnavism was there in various parts
of the world. But the special, you know, special sweetness, the, of madhurya
rasa, and as, of all the more so Parkira, Parkibhava in the madhurya-rasa, that
is revealed by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So, that special sweetness of bhakti comes
in Gaudiya Vaishnavism. So, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, you know, had, you know,
four, you know, signi..., the Goswamis, as his primary disciples, and he sent
them to Vrindavan with four instructions. He told them that you should go to
Vrindavan to excavate the lost, you know, sacred places of the pastimes of
Radha, of Krishna. And then, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Himself started this by
rediscovering, you know, you know, Radhakunda. And Shri Caitanya, asked
Chaitanya, he asked the Goswamis to do that. Second was he told them to, you
know, you know, you know, build temples. So, first is, that ok, wherever there
have been pastimes, uncover those places. And second is, build temples. So, that
the Goswamis, all of them they had their worshipable deities. And Radha Govinda.
Radha Madhan Mohana. Like this. All these beautiful temples. Radha Damodara. All
these temples were built. You know. By the Goswamis. You know. Third was to
write books. How, establishing how pure devotional service is the conclusion of
the teachings of the various scriptures. Of the, all the whole Vedic scriptures
about, it is a vast, vast body. But their conclusion is to, you know, you know,
establish pure devotion us. To teach pure devotional service. As Krishna says:

        vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

That I am to be known. And how is He to be known? He says in 15.15, I am to be
known by the Vedas. And then, He says in 18.55 that He can be known by:

        bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

"yāv...", that He is, can be known by bhakti. So, bhakti is the conclusion of
the Vedic scriptures. As far as the sadhana is concerned. What is the sadhana to
be followed? You know. By which, sadhana to be followed. By which, one can
attain, you know, you know, the, you know, the ultimate revelation that is given
in the Vedic scriptures. That is Krishna. So:

        nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau
        lokānāḿ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau

So, basically, "nānā...", I, you know, what is the living to our context is,
"nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau". "nipuṇau" means expert. The goswamis were
expert in "nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika". "vicāraṇaika" means contemplating.
Considering. Analysing. They analysed the hu..., vast body of scriptures. And
then, "sad-dharma-saḿsthāpakau". You know. They established the "sad-dharma".
"sad-dharma" is the true religious principle. That is of bhakti. You know. And
what, what purpose? "lokānāḿ hita-kāriṇau". For the purpose of doing "hita". For
the purpose of doing good to all people. You know. "lokānāḿ hita-kāriṇau". So,
this was the mission that Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave to the Goswamis. And
they executed. Then, last was to write books. You know. Talking. To exemplify.
And write books about how a devotee should live. You know. So, third and fourth
is different, is, fourth, third is more in terms of siddhanta. To establish
philosophically and scripturally how bhakti is the conclusion of the Vedic
literature. And how that is "sad-dharma". And then, how to practice that
"sad-dharma". Exemplify that. And teach that to others. So, these were the four
instructions that, that given to the Goswamis. Now, the fact that the Goswamis,
especially "Rūpa" and "Sanātana" were the primary disciples of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. And they were primarily in exe..., executing his will. That itself
indicates the universality. Universality of the, you know, message of Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And of the mood of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, actually, "Rūpa" and "Sanātana", they were, you know, they
were forced to become muslims because at that time, the muslim king, Dabir Khas,
you know, the so, you know, so, you know, Nawab Hussain Shah, he saw that, you
know, he wanted to rule. And he wanted commi..., competent ministers at that
time. So, he came to know from the people that these two young men, you know,
they, you know, who, they were very, you know, very intelligent. And very
talented. And very competent. To be ministers. But in that time, the, in the
Vedic culture, you know, you know, for a, you know, they were Saraswat Brahmins
at that time. They were, morning, Saraswat Brahmins that. It is Vedic culture.
So, for a, you know, the culture was such that, for a brahman to accept the
service for a per..., follower of the Vedic culture, to accept the service of a
mleccha, was considered to be like losing the caste. So, they did not want to,
you know, do this. But then, Nawab Hussain Shah has written that, if you do not
serve Me, then, if you do not become a minister for me, then I will, you know,
you know, persecute the whole Vaishnava community. And in order to protect the
Vaishnava community, they did the sacrifice. Of course, they did not sacrifice
their bhakti per say. You know. Externally, they lost their caste. But actually,
they were, remained dil..., diligent devotees. And, you know, where they were
staying in "Rāmakeli", you know, the king, because he saw that they were
competent ministers. And he came to rely on them. So, he gave them opulence,
also. So, within that op..., using that opulence, they created for themselves a
facility for them to practice bhakti sincerely. And they have created almost
like a, you know, you know, you know, hidden Vrindavan in their own palace. In
the garden. So, replica of Vrindavan, where they would meditate on the pastimes
of Radha and Krishna. So, externally, they lost their caste. But internally,
they were lo..., you know, completely fixed in devotion.

In fact, it was sacrifice so that, you know, you know, sacrifice of, b...,
sacrifice in motivated by their devotion, only. And once they had this position
of power, they protected Vaishnava culture. In fact, they, even, not only
protected. They, but they further promoted Vaishnava culture. You know. They
would invite brahmans to their place. And they would give charity to the
brahmans. And that is how they would, you know, you know, you know, protect and
promote the Vedic culture at, vaishnava culture at that time. You know. Now,
o..., of, they have corresponded with Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu through letters.
And eventually, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu came to meet them. He went out of way, in
his travels, to come to "Rāmakeli". He blessed them. And then, he, he initiated
them. It was not a formal fire initiation that sacrifice that was performed. But
it was in principle the siksha, the, you know, the siksha was given. And then,
they decided to renounce the world. Renounce the world. And go to Vrindavan.
As per the instruction of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So, among the two, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" renounced first. And "Sanātana Gosvāmī" renounced later. So, because
"Rūpa Gosvāmī" renounced first, so, Shri Chaitanya Maha..., so, "Sanātana
Gosvāmī" considered "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is senior. Although, "Sanātana Gosvāmī" was
among, the older among the two. But he thought that, actually, he has
surrendered his life first. That is why "Sanātana Gosvāmī", despite being older,
considered himself to be subordinate to "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And "Jīva Gosvāmī",
later on, when he came to, you know, you know, came to, you know, you know,
Vrindavan, you know, you know, and he sought initiation from "Sanātana Gosvāmī".
Because he was the older among the Goswamis. But "Sanātana Gosvāmī" said, you go
to "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And take initiation from "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, in that way, you
know, they, you know, they both lived together. So, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" was
instructed by Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu personally. And he come, those
instructions come in the "Bhakti-rasāmṛ...", you know, in the
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta", also. In the "Madhya-līlā". And "Sanātana Gosvāmī" was
also instructed. And both of them, you know, they, based on the instructions
which Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave them. They combined those instructions. And they
wrote many books. So, one of the most important books that, you know, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" wrote is "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And then, you know, whatever he
talks about, you know, the, he talks about general "Bhakti-rasā". And
especially, he talks further about, you know, madhurya-rasa in terms of analysis
of various emotions in madhurya-rasa. In his book, "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi". Sorry,
not, not "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi". Yeah. "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi". "Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi" is a
book which talks, you know, "nīlamaṇi" is like a blue jewel. So, "Ujjvala" is
effulgent. That means, it is, it is a reference to Krishna. Of course, there can
be many meanings of it. But, you know, this book talks about madhurya-rasa
ela..., elaborately. When the gopi, some gopi is singing some song, you know, in
separation from Krishna. Then, what is the mood at that time? So, they analyse,
this, this, this indicates this rasa. This indicates this end rasa. This
indicates this rasa. Like that. So, it is a very eso..., esoteric and exalted
book. And, and, so, you know, like that, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has written
many, many books. Actually, we will not go into all his books. We are focusing
on "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu"'s English rendition as "Nectar of Devotion". So,
Srila Prabhupada gives this introduction, of "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And then, he
describes how, if we look at the, you know, you know, you know, look at the
introduction. Then, Prabhupada talks about bhakti rasa. So, let us look at
bhakti rasa now. Yeah. You know. So, Srila Prabhupada talks about Bhaga..., you
know, bhak..., here about "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And then, you know, Prabhupada writes
what will happen by studying this book.

"Persons engaged in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement may take advantage of this
great literature and be very solidly situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness."

"be very solidly situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.". So, you know, you know, we
discussed, Prabhupada translates bhakti, not simply as devotion. Or divine love.
He translates it as devotional service. So, devotional service is a compound
word. In which, devotion indicates the internal side. The feeling. And the
service indicates the acting. So, both are there. So, devotional service. That
is Prabhupada's special translation of bhakti. Now, Srila Prabhupada explains
how everybody has an impetus to serve. Everybody has an impetus to, you know,
want some pleasure. And we want some kind of pleasure. Some kind of rasa. And
for that, we act in various ways. But the problem with material emotions is that
they are temporary. So, we may work, you know, and by working, we may get some
enjoyment. So, there is bhoga. And there is "tyāga". So, let us look at this.
So, Srila Prabhupada talks about the, how there is ra..., Prabhupada uses the
word rasa. We will not go into the technicalities of the word rasa over here. We
will simply talk of rasa in terms of pleasure. That is how Srila Prabhupada uses
it. That people get pleasure in various things that they do. So, when they get
pleasure, you know, you know, there is, this pleasure has two aspects. There is
bhoga. And there is "tyāga". Bhoga means enjoyment. And "tyāga" is renunciation.
So, sometimes, when there i..., when we enjoy, you know, par..., particular
activity, then, by enjoying, enjoying, enjoying, we feel, oh, I am enjoying.
Initially, when we start enjoying a particular activity, we feel, yes, this is
wonderful. I want to do it more and more. We are looking forward to it. Suppose,
there is a big feast. And say, my favo..., especial, favorite item is "Gulab
jamun". So, then, I am, I am then told, there is "Gulab jamun". So, I am very
eager for it. And then, I am practically, my mouth is watering. I am salivating.
And then, come on, come on. Come. Come. And then, "Gulab jamun". And if somebody
is serving, when are you going to serve "Gulab jamun"? Come. Come. And then, you
know, suppose, you know, you know, there are unlimited "Gulab jamuns". You can
serve as much as, take as much as you want. So, I take one. Two. Three. Five.
Ten. How much can I take? Fifteen. And then, after some time, you know, I, no,
enough. Enough. Enough. And not just that I am, you know, full in my stomach.
Even if my stomach had lot of capacity. Still, you know, this, it, it, the
satiation comes. You know. There are two words. Satisfaction. And satiation.
When I am satisfied, then I am happy. But satiation means enough. No, I cannot
take more. So, you know, some, over a period of time, if we keep stuffing,
stuffing, then somebody says, take more. No, I do not want it. If somebody
forces into our mouth, we may even vomit it out. No. Why? Because just cannot
take it. So, material enjoyment, there is bhoga, you know, so, there is pleasure
initially. But at the end of it, we get frustrated. We get frustrated. Because
it does not satisfy us. It does not satisfy us. So, whatever material enjoyment
is there, you know, we can say that there is a law of diminishing returns.
Diminishing returns means, initially, we get a lot of pleasure. But afterwards,
the pleasure keep decreasing. Decreasing. Decreasing. And then, after it goes
into negative, if I feel frustrated by it. So, people enjoy for some time. And
after enjoying, then they feel I cannot enjoy anymore. So, they want to give it
up. "tyāga". So, you know, you know, "tyāga" means renunciation. So, one gives
it up. One thinks that, ok, you know, I do not, I do not want to, anything to do
with this. Nothing.

Sometimes, people, say, drink. You know. Somebody drinks alcohol. And drinks. And
drinks. And afterwards, he gets a hangover. He says, I am never going to drink
again. You know. So, he says, I will give it up. Now, of course, most
alcoholics, they have given up alcohol many times. And still, they are
alcoholics. So, the "tyāga" does not last for long. But anyway, "tyāga" is
there. So, in material life, there is a rasa. Which we get through enjoyment.
And when that rasa does not endure, we go to another extreme. And try to
renounce that. You know. So, there is, you know, it is like a pendulum. So, one
extreme of the pendulum is, you know, bhoga. The other extreme of the pendulum
is "tyāga". So, in neither case, does the pleasure endure. The pleasure is
"capala-sukha". Prabhupada uses the word "capala-sukha". And this phrase comes
from, you know, Bhaktivinoda Thakur's song. You know.

        capala sukha-laba lāgi' re

He says "capala sukha". He says, actually, that, that is not a, it is not a
song, song by Bhaktivinoda Thakur. It is a Vaishnava song. Which was given
by, you know, another Vaishnava acharya. So, therein, he says, "capala sukha".
It, I got flickering pleasure. "capala". That is not permanent. It is temporary
pleasure. I got that. And went away. It did not last for long. So, fleeting
enjoyment. 31:06
